                                                         Diffusion Forcing: Next-token Prediction
                                                              Meets Full-Sequence Diffusion


                                                     Boyuan Chen                      Diego Marti Monso∗                     Yilun Du
                                                      MIT CSAIL                  Technical University of Munich             MIT CSAIL
                                                   boyuanc@mit.edu                  diego.marti@tum.de                   yilundu@mit.edu




arXiv:2407.01392v4 [cs.LG] 10 Dec 2024
                                                       Max Simchowitz                       Russ Tedrake             Vincent Sitzmann
                                                         MIT CSAIL                           MIT CSAIL                  MIT CSAIL
                                                      msimchow@mit.edu                     russt@mit.edu            sitzmann@mit.edu



                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      This paper presents Diffusion Forcing, a new training paradigm where a diffusion
                                                      model is trained to denoise a set of tokens with independent per-token noise
                                                      levels. We apply Diffusion Forcing to sequence generative modeling by training
                                                      a causal next-token prediction model to generate one or several future tokens
                                                      without fully diffusing past ones. Our approach is shown to combine the strengths
                                                      of next-token prediction models, such as variable-length generation, with the
                                                      strengths of full-sequence diffusion models, such as the ability to guide sampling
                                                      to desirable trajectories. Our method offers a range of additional capabilities, such
                                                      as (1) rolling-out sequences of continuous tokens, such as video, with lengths past
                                                      the training horizon, where baselines diverge and (2) new sampling and guiding
                                                      schemes that uniquely profit from Diffusion Forcing’s variable-horizon and causal
                                                      architecture, and which lead to marked performance gains in decision-making
                                                      and planning tasks. In addition to its empirical success, our method is proven to
                                                      optimize a variational lower bound on the likelihoods of all subsequences of tokens
                                                      drawn from the true joint distribution. Project website: https://boyuan.space/
                                                      diffusion-forcing


                                         1       Introduction
                                         Probabilistic sequence modeling plays a crucial role in diverse machine learning applications including
                                         natural language processing [6, 48], video prediction [32, 70, 26] and decision making [3, 22]. Next-
                                         token prediction models in particular have a number of desirable properties. They enable the
                                         generation of sequences with varying length [33, 21, 38] (generating only a single token or an
                                         “infinite” number of tokens via auto-regressive sampling), can be conditioned on varying amounts
                                         of history [21, 38], support efficient tree search[71, 23, 25], and can be used for online feedback
                                         control [22, 3].
                                         Current next-token prediction models are trained via teacher forcing [65], where the model predicts
                                         the immediate next token based on a ground truth history of previous tokens. This results in two
                                         limitations: (1) there is no mechanism by which one can guide the sampling of a sequence to
                                         minimize a certain objective, and (2) current next-token models easily become unstable on continuous
                                         data. For example, when attempting to auto-regressively generate a video (as opposed to text [6] or
                                         vector-quantized latents [34]) past the training horizon, slight errors in frame-to-frame predictions
                                         accumulate and the model diverges.
                                             ∗
                                                 Work done as a visiting student at MIT.


                                         38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
                      Guidance   Tree Search        Compositionality              Causal Uncertainty   Flexible Horizon




                                                               Comp off Comp on
                                                  Train. Set




Teacher Forcing

Full-Seq. Diffusion

Diffusion Forcing

Figure 1: Diffusion Forcing capabilities. Today, different applications such as language modeling [6],
planning [37], or video generation [32, 70] rely on either auto-regressive next-token prediction or
full-sequence diffusion, according to their respective unique capabilities. The proposed Diffusion
Forcing is a novel sequence generative model that enjoys key strengths of both model types.


Full-sequence diffusion seemingly offers a solution. Commonly used in video generation and
long-horizon planning, one directly models the joint distribution of a fixed number of tokens by
diffusing their concatenation [32, 1], where the noise level is identical across all tokens. They
offer diffusion guidance [31, 16] to guide sampling to a desirable sequence, invaluable in decision-
making (planning) applications [37, 35]. They further excel at generating continuous signals such as
video [32]. However, full-sequence diffusion is universally parameterized via non-causal, unmasked
architectures. In addition to restricting sampling to full sequences, as opposed to variable length
generation, we show that this limits the possibilities for both guidance and subsequence generation
(Figure 1). Further, we demonstrate that a naive attempt at combining the best of both worlds
by training a next-token prediction model for full-sequence diffusion leads to poor generations,
intuitively because it does not model the fact that small uncertainty in an early token necessitates
high uncertainty in a later one.
In this paper, we introduce Diffusion Forcing (DF), a training and sampling paradigm where each
token is associated with a random, independent noise level, and where tokens can be denoised
according to arbitrary, independent, per-token schedules through a shared next-or-next-few-token
prediction model. Our approach is motivated by the observation that noising tokens is a form of
partial masking—zero noise means a token is unmasked, and complete noise fully masks out a token.
Thus, DF forces the model to learn to “unmask” any collection of variably noised tokens (Figure 2).
Simultaneously, by parameterizing predictions as a composition of next-token prediction models, our
system can flexibly generate varying length sequences as well as compositionally generalize to new
trajectories (Figure 1).
We implement DF for sequence generation as Causal Diffusion Forcing (CDF), in which future
tokens depend on past ones via a causal architecture. We train the model to denoise all tokens of
a sequence at once, with an independent noise level per token. During sampling, CDF gradually
denoises a sequence of Gaussian noise frames into clean samples where different frames may have
different noise levels at each denoising step. Like next-token prediction models, CDF can generate
variable-length sequences; unlike next-token prediction, it does so stabily from the immediate next
token to thousands of tokens in the future – even for continuous tokens. Moreover, like full-sequence
diffusion it accepts guidance towards high-reward generations. Synergistically leveraging causality,
flexible horizon, and variable noise schedules, CDF enables a new capability, Monte Carlo Guidance
(MCG), that dramatically improves the sampling of high-reward generations compared to non-causal
full-sequence diffusion models. Fig. 1 overviews these capabilities.
In summary, our contributions are: (1) We propose Diffusion Forcing, a new probabilistic sequence
model that has the flexibility of next-token prediction models while being able to perform long-
horizon guidance like full-sequence diffusion models. (2) Taking advantage of Diffusion Forcing’s
unique capabilities, we introduce a novel decision-making framework that allows us to use Diffusion
Forcing as simultaneously a policy ([10]) and as a planner ([37]). (3) We formally prove that,
under appropriate conditions, optimizing our proposed training objective maximizes a lower bound
on the likelihood of the joint distribution of all sub-sequences observed at training time. (4) We
empirically evaluate CDF across diverse domains such as video generation, model-based planning,
visual imitation learning, and time series prediction, and demonstrate CDF’s unique capabilities,


                                                  2
    Noise as Masking                      Diffusion Forcing        Teacher Forcing   Full-Seq. Diffusion
Noise                                                   x̂0t

                               Training




                        Time
                                                       xK
         Observation                                    t



         Latent State          Sampling
         Generation
         Add Noise                                      x̂0t


Figure 2: Method Overview. Diffusion Forcing trains causal sequence neural networks (such as
an RNN or a masked transformer) to denoise flexible-length sequences where each frame of the
sequence can have a different noise level. In contrast, next-token prediction models, common in
language modeling, are trained to predict a single next token from a ground-truth sequence (teacher
forcing [65]), and full-sequence diffusion, common in video generation, train non-causal architectures
to denoise all frames in a sequence at once with the same noise level. Diffusion Forcing thus
interleaves the time axis of the sequence and the noise axis of diffusion, unifying strengths of both
alternatives and enabling completely new capabilities (see Secs. 3.2,3.4).

such as stabilizing long-rollout autoregressive video generation, composing sub-sequences of those
observed at training time with user-determined memory horizon, Monte Carlo Guidance, and more.

2       Related Work and Preliminaries

We discuss related work and preliminaries for our core application, sequence generative modeling;
see Appendix C for further literature review.
Our method unifies two perspectives on sequence modeling: Bayesian filtering along the time
axis, denoted by subscript t, and diffusion along an “uncertainty” (or noise level) axis denoted by
superscript k. In the following, we denote observations as x ∈ X and latent states as z ∈ Z.
Bayesian Filtering. Given a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) defined by latent states zt and obser-
vations xt , a Bayes filter is a probabilistic method for estimating latent states recursively over time
from incoming observations. A prior model p(zt+1 |zt ) infers a belief over the next state given only
the current state, and an observation model infers a belief over the next observation given the current
latent state p(xt |zt ). When a new observation is made, a posterior model p(zt+1 |zt , xt+1 ) provides
an updated estimation of the next latent state zt+1 . When trained end-to-end with neural networks
[22, 23], latent states are not an estimate of any physical quantity, but a sufficiently expressive latent
that summarizes past observations for predicting future observations (xt′ )t′ >t in the sequence.
Diffusion Models. Diffusion models [57, 29] have proven to be highly expressive and reliable
generative models. We review their essentials here. Let q(x) denote a data distribution of interest,
and let x0 ≡ x ∼ q. We consider a forward diffusion process that gradually adds Gaussian noise to a
data point over a series of time steps. This process is modeled as a Markov chain, where the data at
each step k is noised incrementally:
                                                    p
                              q(xk |xk−1 ) = N (xk ; 1 − βk xk−1 , βk I)                       (2.1)
where N is the normal distribution and βk is the variance of the noise added at each step controlled
by a schedule {βk ∈ (0, 1)}Kk=1 . The process continues until the data is converted into pure noise at
xK . The reverse process is also a Markov chain and attempts to recreate the original data from the
noise with a parameterized model pθ :
                                     pθ (xk−1 |xk ) = N (xk−1 ; µ(xk , k), γk I),                   (2.2)
where the mean µ is a model with a neural network, and where it is shown [30] that one can set
the covariance to the identity scaled by a fixed constant γk depending on k. Adopting the standard


                                                               3
                                                                             √                √
exposition, we reparametrize the mean µ in terms of noise prediction ϵ = ( 1 − ᾱt )−1 xkt t − ᾱt µ.
This leads [29] to the following least squares objective:
                                L(θ) = Ek,x0 ,ϵ ∥ϵk − ϵθ (xk , k)∥2 ,
                                                                     
                                                                                               (2.3)
         k
             √       0
                         √         k       k
where x = ᾱt x + 1 − ᾱt ϵ and ϵ ∼ N (0, I) . One can then sample from this model via
Langevin dynamics xk−1 ← √1αk (xkt − √1−α       k
                                             1−ᾱ θ
                                                   ϵ (xkt , k) + σk w) [29].
                                                k

Guidance of Diffusion Models. Guidance [31, 16] allows biasing diffusion generation towards
desirable predictions at sampling time. We focus on classifier guidance [16]: given a classifier
c(y|xk ) of some desired y (e.g. class or √  success indicator), one modifies the Langevin sampling
[30] gradient ϵθ (xk , k) to be ϵθ (xk , k) − 1 − ᾱk ∇xk log c(y|xk ). This allows sampling from the
joint distribution of x and class label y without the need to train a conditional model. Other energies
such as a least-squares objective comparing the model output to a desirable ground truth have been
explored in applications such as decision making [16, 37].
Next-Token Prediction Models. Next-token prediction models are sequence models that predict the
next frame xt+1 given past frames x1:t . At training time, one feeds a neural network with x1:t and
minimizes ||x̂ − x||2 for continuous data or a cross-entropy loss for discrete data [65]. At sampling
time, one samples the next frame x̂t+1 following p(xt+1 |x1:t ). If one treats x̂t+1 as xt+1 , one can
use the same model to predict xt+2 and repeat until a full sequence is sampled. Unlike full-sequence
diffusion models, next-token models do not accept multi-step guidance, as prior frames must be fully
determined to sample future frames.
Diffusion Sequence Models. Diffusion has been widely used in sequence modeling. [44] use full-
sequence diffusion models to achieve controllable text generation via guidance, such as generating
text following specified parts of speech. [32] trains full-sequence diffusion models to synthesize short
videos and uses a sliding window to roll out longer conditioned on previously generated frames. [37]
uses full-sequence diffusion models as planners in offline reinforcement learning. This is achieved by
training on a dataset of interaction trajectories with the environment and using classifier guidance
at sampling time to sample trajectories with high rewards towards a chosen goal. [50] modifies
auto-regressive models to denoise the next token conditioned on previous tokens. It trains with
teacher forcing [65] and samples next-token auto-regressively for time series data. Most similar to
our work is AR-Diffusion [66], which trains full-sequence text diffusion with a causal architecture
with linearly dependent noise level along the time axis. We provide a detailed comparision between
this approach and ours in Appendix C.

3     Method

3.1   Noising as partial masking
Recall that masking is the practice of occluding a subset of data, such as patches of an image [27] or
timesteps in a sequence [15, 49], and training a model to recover unmasked portions. Without loss of
generality, we can view any collection of tokens, sequential or not, as an ordered set indexed by t.
Training next-token prediction with teacher forcing can then be interpreted as masking each token
xt at time t and making predictions from the past x1:t−1 . Restricted to sequences, we refer to all
these practices as masking along the time axis. We can also view full-sequence forward diffusion, i.e.,
gradually adding noise to the data x01:T ≡ x1:T , as a form of partial masking, which we refer to as
masking along the noise axis. Indeed, after K steps of noising, xK  1:T is (approximately) pure white
noise without information about the original data.
We establish a unified view along both axes of masking (see Fig. 2). We denote x1:T for a sequence of
tokens, where the subscript indicates the time axis. As above, xkt t denotes xt at noise level kt under
the forward diffusion process (2.1); x0t = x is the unnoised token, and xK   t is white noise N (0, I).
Thus, (xkt t )1≤t≤T denotes a sequence of noisy observations where each token has a different noise
level kt , which can be seen as the degree of partial masking applied to each token through noising.

3.2   Diffusion Forcing: different noise levels for different tokens
Diffusion Forcing (DF) is a framework for training and sampling arbitrary sequence lengths of noisy
tokens (xkt t )1≤t≤T , where critically, the noise level kt of each token can vary by time step. In this


                                                    4
Algorithm 1 Diffusion Forcing Training                           Algorithm 2 DF Sampling with Guidance
 1: loop                                                 1: Input: Model θ, scheduling matrix K, initial latent
 2:   Sample tajectory of observations (x1 , ..., xT ).     z0 , guidance cost c(·).
                                                                                                 2
 3: for t = 1, ..., T do                                 2: Initialize x1 , . . . , xT ∼ N (0, σK  I).
 4:      Sample independent noise level kt ∈ 3: for row m = M − 1, ..., 0 do
         {0, 1, ..., K}                                  4: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 5:      xkt t = ForwardDiffuse(xt , kt )                5:       znew
                                                                   t    ∼ pθ (zt | zt−1 , xt , Km+1,t ).
                         kt √                            6:       k ← Km,t , w ∼ N (0, I).
                       xt − ᾱkt xt
 6:      Define ϵt = √1−ᾱ                               7:       xnew  ← √1αk (xt − √1−α     k
                                                                                                 ϵ (znew , xt , k)) +
                                  kt                                t                     1−ᾱk θ     t

 7:                                        kt
         Update zt ∼ pθ (zt |zt−1 , xt , kt ).                    σ k w
                                                         8:       Update zt ← znew      .
 8:      Set ϵ̂t = ϵθ (zt−1 , xkt t , kt )                                            t
                                                         9: end for
 9: end for
                                                        10: x1:H ←AddGuidance(xnew                          new
                                                                                           1:H , ∇x log c(x1:H ))
10:    L =MSELoss([ϵ̂1 , ..., ϵ̂n ] , [ϵ1 , ..., ϵn ])
                                                        11: end for
11: Backprop with L and update θ
                                                        12: Return x1:T .
12: end loop


paper, we focus on time series data, and thus instantiate Diffusion Forcing with causal architectures
(where xkt t depends only on past noisy tokens), which we call Causal Diffusion Forcing (CDF). For
simplicity, we focus on a minimal implementation with a vanilla Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
[11]. Potential transformer implementation of Diffusion Forcing is also possible but we defer its
discussion to Appendix B.1.
The RNN with weights θ maintains latents zt capturing the influence of past tokens, and these evolve
via dynamics zt ∼ pθ (zt |zt−1 , xkt t , kt ) with a recurrent layer. When an incoming noisy observation
xkt t is made, the hidden state is updated in a Markovian fashion zt ∼ pθ (zt |zt−1 , xkt t , kt )2 . When
kt = 0, this is the posterior update in Bayes filtering; whereas when kt = K (and xK     t is pure noise
and thus uninformative), this is equivalent to modeling the “prior distribution” pθ (zt | zt−1 ) in Bayes
filtering. Given latent zt , an observation model pθ (x0t |zt ) predicts xt .
Training. The dynamics model pθ (zt |zt−1 , xkt t , kt ) and the observation model pθ (x0t |zt ) together
form a RNN unit. Such unit has the same input-output behavior as a standard conditional diffusion
model, using a conditioning variable zt−1 and a noisy token xkt t as input to predict the noise-free
xt = x0t and thus, indirectly, the noise ϵkt via affine reparametrization [30]. We can thus directly
train (Causal) Diffusion Forcing with the conventional diffusion training objective. We parameterize
the aforementioned unit in terms of noise prediction ϵθ (zt−1 , xkt t , kt ). We then find parameters θ by
minimizing the loss
                                                       T
                                                       Xh                                     i
                                        E                      ∥ϵt − ϵθ (zt−1 , xkt t , kt )∥2 ,                 (3.1)
                                    kt ,xt ,ϵt
                                               k         t=1
                            zt ∼pθ (zt |zt−1 ,xt t ,kt )


where we sample k1:T uniformly from [K]T , x1:T from our training data, and ϵt ∼ N (0, σk2t I) in
accordance with the forward diffusion process (see Algorithm 1 for pseudocode). Importantly, the
loss (3.1) captures essential elements of Bayesian filtering and conditional diffusion. In Appendix D.1,
we further re-derive common techniques in diffusion model training for Diffusion Forcing, which
proves extremely useful for video prediction experiments. In Appendix B.2, we discuss the need
of sampling k1:T uniformly. Finally, we prove the validity of this objective stated informally in the
following Theorem 3.1 in Appendix A.
Theorem 3.1 (Informal). The Diffusion Forcing training procedure (Algorithm 1) optimizes a
reweighting of an Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) on the expected log-likelihoods ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T ),
where the expectation is averaged over noise levels k1:T ∼ [K]T and xkt t noised according to the
forward process. Moreover, under appropriate conditions, optimizing (3.1) also maximizes a lower
bound on the likelihood for all sequences of noise levels, simultaneously.

   2
    We implement zt = pθ (zt |zt−1 , xkt t , kt ) to be deterministic, with zt representing a distribution over beliefs
rather than a sample from it. This allows training by backpropogating through the latent dynamics in Eq.(3.1).


                                                               5
We remark that a special case of ‘all sequences of noise levels’ are those for which either kt = 0
or kt = K; thus, one can mask out any prior token and DF will learn to sample from the correct
conditional distribution, modeling the distribution of all possible sub-sequences of the training set.
Sampling. Diffusion Forcing sampling is depicted in Algorithm 2 and is defined by prescribing a
noise schedule on a 2D M × T grid K ∈ [K]M ×T ; columns correspond to time step t and rows
indexed by m determine noise-level. Km,t represents the desired noise level of the time-step t
token for row m. To generate a whole sequence of length T , initialize the tokens x1:T to be white
noise, corresponding to noise level k = K. We iterate down the grid row-by-row, denoising left-
to-right across columns to the noise levels prescribed by K. By the last row m = 0, the tokens are
clean, i.e. their noise level is K0,t ≡ 0. Appendix D.5 discusses corner cases of this scheme; the
hyperparameters (αk , ᾱk , σk ) are set to their standard values [30]. The matrix K specifies how fast
each token gets denoised at every step of sequence diffusion. Since Diffusion Forcing is trained
to denoise tokens of all sequences of noise levels, K can be designed to flexibly achieve different
behaviors without re-training the model.

3.3   New Capabilities in Sequence Generation

We now explain the new capabilities this flexible sampling paradigm has to offer.

Stable Auto-Reg.              Diffuse w/                          Full Traj.                Condition on
Rollout                       Causal Uncertainty                  Guidance                  Currupted Obs.




Stabilizing autoregressive generation. For high-dimensional, continuous sequences such as video,
auto-regressive architectures are known to diverge, especially when sampling past the training horizon.
In contrast, Diffusion Forcing can stably roll out long sequences even beyond the training sequence
length by updating the latents using the previous latent associated with slightly “noisy tokens” for
some small noise level 0 < k ≪ K. Our experiments (Sec. 4.1) illustrates the resulting marked
improvements in long-horizon generation capabilities; App. B.4 provides further intuition.
Keeping the future uncertain. Beginning from a sequence of white noise tokens [xK                         K    K ⊤
                                                                                                     1 , x2 , x3 ] ,
                                                                                              0   K/2     K ⊤
we may denoise the first token fully and the second token partially, yielding [x1 , x2 , x3 ] , then
              K/2
[x01 , x02 , x3 ]⊤ , and finally denoising all tokens fully to [x01 , x02 , x03 ]⊤ . Interpreting the noise level as
uncertainty, this “zig-zag” sampling scheme intuitively encodes the immediate future as more certain
than the far future. Sec. 3.4 describes how this leads to more effective sequence guidance.
Long-horizon Guidance. In Line 10 of Algorithm 2, one may add guidance to the partially diffused
trajectory x1:T as in Sec. 2. Due to the dependency of future tokens on the past, guidance gradients
from future tokens can propagate backwards in time. The unique advantage of Diffusion Forcing is
that, because we can diffuse future tokens without fully diffusing the past, the gradient guides the
sampling of past tokens, thereby achieving long-horizon guidance while respecting causality. We
elaborate on implementation details in Appendix B.3. As we show in Section 4.2, planning in this
manner significantly outperforms guided full-sequence diffusion models.

3.4   Diffusion Forcing for Flexible Sequential Decision Making

The capabilities offered by Diffusion Forcing motivate our novel framework for sequential decision
making (SDM), with key applications to robotics and autonomous agents. Consider a Markov
Decision Process defined by an environment with dynamics p(st+1 |st , at ), observation p(ot |st ) and
reward p(rt |st , at ). The goal is to train a policy π(at |o1:t ) such that the expected cumulative reward
                    PT
of a trajectory E[ t=1 rt ] is maximized. We assign tokens xt = [at , rt , ot+1 ]. A trajectory is a
sequence x1:T , possibly of variable length; training is conducted as in Algorithm 1. At each step t
of execution, past (noise-free) tokens x1:t−1 are summarized by a latent zt−1 . Conditioned on this
latent, we sample, via Algorithm 2, a plan x̂t:t+H , with x̂t = [ât , r̂t , ôt+1 ]⊤ containing predicted
actions, rewards and observations. H is a look-ahead window, analogous to future predictions in
model predictive control [20]. After taking planned action ât , the environment produces a reward rt


                                                         6
                                                       DMLab                                                     Minecraft
                                                       Input   Generations    496   500         996   1000       Input   Generations    496   500         996   1000




Teacher Forcing Causal Full-Seq. Diffusion Forcing
                                                                                                                                           
                                               Seq 2                                                         Seq 2

                                                                                                                                           
                                               Seq 1                                                         Seq 1


                                                                                                                                           
                                               Seq 2                                                         Seq 2

                                                                                                                                           
                                               Seq 1                                                         Seq 1


                                                                                                                                           
                                               Seq 2                                                         Seq 2

                                                                                                                                           
                                               Seq 1                                                         Seq 1

        Figure 3: Video Generation. Among tested methods, Diffusion Forcing generations are uniquely
        temporally consistent and do not diverge even when rolling out well past the training horizon. Please
        see the project website for video results.

        and next observation ot+1 , yielding next token xt = [ât , rt , ot+1 ]⊤ . The latent is updated according
        to the posterior pθ (zt |zt−1 , xt , 0). Our framework enables functionality as both policy and planner:
      Flexible planning horizon. Diffusion Forcing (a) can be deployed on tasks of variable horizon,
      because each new action is selected sequentially, and (b) its lookahead window H can be shortened to
      lower latency (using Diffusion Forcing as a policy), or lengthened to perform long-horizon planning
      (via guidance described below), without re-training or modifications of the architecture. Note that (a)
      is not possible for full-sequence diffusion models like Diffuser [37] with full-trajectory generation
      horizons, whereas diffusion policies [10] need fixed, small lookahead sizes, precluding (b).
        Flexible reward guidance. As detailed in Appendix B.3, Diffusion Forcing can plan via guidance
        using any reward (in place of log c) specified over future steps: this includes dense per-time step
                                         PT                                            Pt+H
        rewards on the entire trajectory t=1 rt , dense rewards on a future lookahead t′ =t rt , and sparse
        rewards indicating goal completion −∥oT − g∥2 . Per-time step policies cannot take advantage of
        this latter, longer horizon guidance.
      Monte Carlo Guidance (MCG), future uncertainty. Causal Diffusion Forcing allows us to influ-
      ence the generation of a token xkt by guidance on the whole distribution of future xt+1:T . Instead
      of drawing a single trajectory sample to calculate this guidance gradient, we can draw multiple
      samples of the future and average their guidance gradients. We call this Monte Carlo Guidance. In
      the spirit of so-called shooting methods like MPPI [64], xkt is then guided by the expected reward
      over the distribution of all future outcomes instead of one particular outcome. The effect of MCG is
      enhanced when combined with sampling schedules that keep the noise level of future tokens high
      when denoising immediate next tokens (e.g. the zig-zag schedule described in Sec. 3.3), accounting
      for greater uncertainty farther into the future. Appendix B.5 further justifies the significance of MCG,
      and why Diffusion Forcing uniquely takes advantage of it.

        4                                              Experiments

     We extensively evaluate Diffusion Forcing’s merits as a generative sequence model across diverse
     applications in video and time series prediction, planning, and imitation learning. Please find the
     dataset and reproducibility details in the Appendix, as well as video results on the project website.

        4.1                                             Video Prediction: Consistent, Stable Sequence Generation and Infinite Rollout.

     We train a convolutional RNN implementation of Causal Diffusion Forcing for video generative
     modeling on videos of Minecraft gameplay [69] and DMLab navigation [69]. At sampling time, we


                                                                                                        7
             Maze2d-medium-v1                            Maze2d-large-v1                                   start            end
             denoising steps                             denoising steps




D3F (Ours)




Diffuser

                Environment     MPPI   CQL    IQL    Diffuser*         Diffuser w/ diffused action   Ours wo/ MCG       Ours
    Maze2D             U-Maze   33.2   5.7    47.4   113.9 ± 3.1               6.3 ± 2.1               110.1 ± 3.9   116.7 ± 2.0
    Maze2D             Medium   10.2   5.0    34.9   121.5 ± 2.7               13.5±2.3               136.1 ± 10.2   149.4 ± 7.5
    Maze2D             Large     5.1   12.5   58.6   123.0 ± 6.4               6.3 ±2.1               142.8 ± 5.6    159.0 ± 2.7
        Single-task Average     16.2   7.7    47.0     119.5                       8.7                  129.67         141.7
    Multi2D            U-Maze   41.2    -     24.8   128.9 ± 1.8               32.8±1.7               107.7 ± 4.9    119.1 ± 4.0
    Multi2D            Medium   15.4    -     12.1   127.2 ± 3.4               22.0±2.7               145.6 ± 6.5    152.3 ± 9.9
    Multi2D            Large     8.0    -     13.9   132.1 ± 5.8               6.9 ±1.7               129.8 ± 1.5    167.1 ±2.7
         Multi-task Average     21.5    -     16.9     129.4                      20.6                   127.7         146.2

 Table 1: Diffusion Forcing for Planning. (top) During sampling, Diffusion Forcing allows each time
 step to be denoised on different noise schedules, enabling us to account for causal uncertainty during
 guided planning. Diffusion Forcing keeps the far future more uncertain than the near future while
 Diffuser [37] puts them at the same noise level during sampling. (bottom) Quantitatively, Diffusion
 Forcing achieves the highest average reward across runs. Diffuser fails dramatically when executing
 the actually generated actions, requiring a hand-crafted PD controller (indicated by the asterisk) and
 ignoring generated actions.

 perform auto-regressive rollout with stabilization proposed in Sec. 3.3. We consider two baselines,
 both leveraging the same exact RNN architecture: a next-frame diffusion baseline trained with
 teacher forcing [65] as well as a causal full-sequence diffusion model. Figure 3 displays qualitative
 results of roll-outs generated by Diffusion Forcing and baselines starting from unseen frames for both
 datasets. While Diffusion Forcing succeeds at stably rolling out even far beyond its training horizon
 (e.g. 1000 frames), teacher forcing and full-sequence diffusion baselines diverge quickly. Further,
 within the training horizon, we observe that full-sequence diffusion suffers from frame-to-frame
 discontinuity where video sequences jump dramatically, while Diffusion Forcing roll-outs show
 ego-motion through a consistent 3D environment. This highlights the ability of Diffusion Forcing to
 stabilize rollouts of high-dimensional sequences without compounding errors.

  4.2 Diffusion Planning: MCG, Causal Uncertainty, Flexible Horizon Control.

 Decision-making uniquely benefits from Diffusion Forcing’s capabilities. We evaluate our proposed
 decision-making framework in a standard offline RL benchmark, D4RL [18]. Specifically, we
 benchmark Diffusion Forcing on a set of 2D maze environments with sparse reward. An agent
 is tasked with reaching a designated goal position starting from a random starting position. In
 Appendix E.5 we provide a detailed description of the environment. The benchmark provides a
 dataset of random walks through mazes (thus stochastic). We train one model per maze.
 We benchmark the proposed decision-making framework 3.4 with state-of-the-art offline RL methods
 and the recently introduced Diffuser [37], a diffusion planning framework. See Fig. 1 for qualitative
 and quantitative results: DF outperforms Diffuser and all baselines across all 6 environments.
  Benefit of Monte Carlo Guidance. The typical goal for an RL problem is to find actions that
  maximize the expected future rewards, which we achieve through MCG. Full-sequence diffusion
  models such as Diffuser do not support sampling to maximize expected reward, as we formally
  derive in Appendix B.5. To understand MCG’s importance, we ablate it in Table 1. Removing MCG
  guidance degrades our performance, though Diffusion Forcing remains competitive even then.


                                                                   8
                           Stateful Cases                    Generated Video
                           Case A   Case B                    Input   Predictions   120       180   240   300   360   420   480




Goal State Interm. State                     Outs. Cam Wristcam



Figure 4: In our real robot task, a robot arm is asked to swap the slots of two fruits using a third slot.
Since the fruits are input in random slots at the beginning, one cannot determine the next steps from a
single observation without knowledge of the initial placement of the fruits. As illustrated in (a) and
(b), the upper observation is the same but the desired outcome illustrated below can vary—the task
thus requires remembering the initial configuration. In addition, as shown in (c), the same model that
generates actions also synthesizes realistic video from just a single frame.

Benefit of Modeling Causality. Unlike pure generative modeling, sequential decision-making takes
actions and receives feedback. Due to compounding uncertainty, the immediate next actions are
more important than those in the far future. Though Diffuser and subsequent models are trained to
generate sequences of action-reward-state tuples [at , rt , ot ], directly executing the actions will lead
to a trajectory that deviates significantly from the generated states. In other words, the generated
states and actions are not causally consistent with each other. To address this shortcoming, Diffuser’s
implementation ignores the generated actions and instead relies on a hand-crafted PD controller to
infer actions from generated states. In Table 1, we see that Diffuser’s performance drops dramatically
when directly executing generated actions. In contrast, Diffusion Forcing’s raw action generations
are self-consistent, outperforming even actions selected by combining Diffuser’s state predictions
with a handcrafted PD controller.
Benefit of Flexible Horizon. Many RL tasks have a fixed horizon, requiring the planning horizon to
shrink as an agent makes progress in the task. Diffusion Forcing accomplishes this by design, while
full-sequence models like Diffuser perform poorly even with tweaks, as we explain in Appendix B.6.


4.3                           Controllable Sequential Compositional Generation

We demonstrate that by only modifying the sampling scheme, we can flexibly compose sub-sequences
of sequences observed at training time. We consider a dataset of trajectories on a 2D, square plane,
where all trajectories start from one corner and end up in the opposite corner, forming a cross
shape. As shown in Fig. 1, when no compositional behavior is desired, one can let DF keep full
memory, replicating the cross-shaped distribution. When one desires compositionality, one can
let the model generate shorter plans without memory using MPC, leading to the stitching of the
cross’s sub-trajectories, forming a V-shaped trajectory. Due to limited space, we defer the result to
Appendix E.2.


4.4                           Robotics: Long horizon imitation learning and robust visuomotor control

Finally, we illustrate that Diffusion Forcing (DF) opens up new opportunities in the visuomotor
control of real-world robots. Imitation learning [10] is a popular technique in robotic manipulation
where one learns an observation-to-action mapping from expert demonstrations. However, the lack
of memory often prevents imitation learning from accomplishing long-horizon tasks. DF not only
alleviates this shortcoming but also provides a way to make imitation learning robust.
Imitation Learning with Memory. We collect a dataset of videos and actions by teleoperating with
a Franka robot. In the chosen task, one needs to swap the position of an apple and an orange, using
a third slot. See Fig. 4 for an illustration. The initial positions of the fruits are randomized such
that there are two possible goal states. As illustrated in Fig. 4, when one fruit is in the third slot, the
desired outcome cannot be inferred from the current observation—a policy must remember the initial
configuration to determine which fruit to move. In contrast to common behavior cloning methods,
DF naturally incorporates memory in its latent state. We found that DF achieves 80% success rate
while diffusion policy [10], a state-of-the-art imitation learning algorithm without memory, fails.


                                                                                          9
Robustness to missing or noisy observations. Because it incorporates principles from Bayes
filtering, Diffusion Forcing can perform imitation learning while being robust to noisy or missing
observations. We demonstrate this by adding visual distractions and even fully occluding the camera
during execution. DF allows us to easily indicate these observations as “noisy” by using k > 0, in
which case DF relies heavily on its prior model to predict actions. Consequently, the success rate is
only lowered by 4% to 76%. In contrast, a next-frame diffusion model baseline attains a success rate
of 48%: it must treat perturbed observations as ground truth and suffers out-of-distribution error.
Potential for pre-training with video. Finally, in parallel to generating actions, Fig. 4 illustrates
that Diffusion Forcing is capable of generating a video of the robot performing the task given only an
initial frame, unifying diffusion policy/imitation learning and video generative modeling and paving
the way to pre-training on unlabeled video.

4.5   Time Series Forecasting: Diffusion Forcing is a Good General-purpose Sequence Model
In Appendix E, we show that DF is competitive with prior diffusion [50] and transformer-based [51]
work on multivariate time series forecasting, following the experimental setup of [54].

5     Discussion
Limitations. Our current causal implementation is based on an RNN. Applications to higher-
resolution video or more complex distributions likely require large transformer models following
instructions in Appendix B.1. We do not investigate the scaling behavior of Diffusion Forcing to
internet-scale datasets and tasks.
Conclusion. In this paper, we introduced Diffusion Forcing, a new training paradigm where a model
is trained to denoise sets of tokens with independent, per-token noise levels. Applied to time series
data, we show how a next-token prediction model trained with Diffusion Forcing combines the
benefits of both next-token models and full-sequence diffusion models. We introduced new sampling
and guidance schemes that lead to dramatic performance gains when applied to tasks in sequential
decision making. Future work may investigate the application of Diffusion Forcing to domains other
than time series generative modeling, and scale up Diffusion Forcing to larger datasets.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2211259,
by the Singapore DSTA under DST00OECI20300823 (3D Self-Supervised Learning for Label-Efficient Vision),
by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/ Interior Business
Center (DOI/IBC) under 140D0423C0075, and by the Amazon Science Hub.


References
 [1] A. Ajay, Y. Du, A. Gupta, J. Tenenbaum, T. Jaakkola, and P. Agrawal. Is conditional generative modeling
     all you need for decision-making? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15657, 2022.
 [2] A. Alexandrov, K. Benidis, M. Bohlke-Schneider, V. Flunkert, J. Gasthaus, T. Januschowski, D. C. Maddix,
     S. Rangapuram, D. Salinas, J. Schulz, L. Stella, A. C. Türkmen, and Y. Wang. Gluonts: Probabilistic and
     neural time series modeling in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(116):1–6, 2020.
 [3] C. Berner, G. Brockman, B. Chan, V. Cheung, P. Debiak, C. Dennison, D. Farhi, Q. Fischer, S. Hashme,
     C. Hesse, R. Józefowicz, S. Gray, C. Olsson, J. Pachocki, M. Petrov, H. P. de Oliveira Pinto, J. Raiman,
     T. Salimans, J. Schlatter, J. Schneider, S. Sidor, I. Sutskever, J. Tang, F. Wolski, and S. Zhang. Dota 2 with
     large scale deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1912.06680, 2019.
 [4] A. Blattmann, T. Dockhorn, S. Kulal, D. Mendelevitch, M. Kilian, D. Lorenz, Y. Levi, Z. English, V. Voleti,
     A. Letts, V. Jampani, and R. Rombach. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to
     large datasets, 2023.
 [5] A. Block, A. Jadbabaie, D. Pfrommer, M. Simchowitz, and R. Tedrake. Provable guarantees for generative
     behavior cloning: Bridging low-level stability and high-level behavior. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
 [6] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
     A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler,
     J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner,
     S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
     abs/2005.14165, 2020.


                                                       10
 [7] S. H. Chan. Tutorial on diffusion models for imaging and vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18103, 2024.
 [8] M. Chen, A. Radford, R. Child, J. Wu, H. Jun, D. Luan, and I. Sutskever. Generative pretraining from
     pixels. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1691–1703. PMLR, 2020.
 [9] T. Chen. On the importance of noise scheduling for diffusion models, 2023.
[10] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Diffusion policy:
     Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion, 2024.
[11] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, Ç. Gülçehre, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio. Learning phrase
     representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078,
     2014.
[12] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio. A recurrent latent variable model
     for sequential data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
[13] J. Cohen, E. Rosenfeld, and Z. Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized smoothing. In
     international conference on machine learning, pages 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019.
[14] E. de Bézenac, S. S. Rangapuram, K. Benidis, M. Bohlke-Schneider, R. Kurle, L. Stella, H. Hasson,
     P. Gallinari, and T. Januschowski. Normalizing kalman filters for multivariate time series analysis. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.
[15] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
     language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018.
[16] P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. CoRR, abs/2105.05233, 2021.
[17] C. Feichtenhofer, Y. Li, K. He, et al. Masked autoencoders as spatiotemporal learners. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 35:35946–35958, 2022.
[18] J. Fu, A. Kumar, O. Nachum, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. D4RL: datasets for deep data-driven reinforcement
     learning. CoRR, abs/2004.07219, 2020.
[19] S. Gao, P. Zhou, M.-M. Cheng, and S. Yan. Masked diffusion transformer is a strong image synthesizer. In
     Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 23164–23173, 2023.
[20] C. E. Garcia, D. M. Prett, and M. Morari. Model predictive control: Theory and practice—a survey.
     Automatica, 25(3):335–348, 1989.
[21] F. Gers, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Cummins. Learning to forget: continual prediction with lstm. In 1999
     Ninth International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks ICANN 99. (Conf. Publ. No. 470), volume 2,
     pages 850–855 vol.2, 1999.
[22] D. Hafner, T. P. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent
     imagination. CoRR, abs/1912.01603, 2019.
[23] D. Hafner, T. P. Lillicrap, I. Fischer, R. Villegas, D. Ha, H. Lee, and J. Davidson. Learning latent dynamics
     for planning from pixels. CoRR, abs/1811.04551, 2018.
[24] T. Hang, S. Gu, C. Li, J. Bao, D. Chen, H. Hu, X. Geng, and B. Guo. Efficient diffusion training via
     min-snr weighting strategy, 2024.
[25] N. Hansen, X. Wang, and H. Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive control, 2022.
[26] W. Harvey, S. Naderiparizi, V. Masrani, C. Weilbach, and F. Wood. Flexible diffusion modeling of long
     videos. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 27953–27965. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
[27] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision
     learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
     16000–16009, 2022.
[28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385,
     2015.
[29] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[30] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. CoRR, abs/2006.11239, 2020.
[31] J. Ho and T. Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022.
[32] J. Ho, T. Salimans, A. Gritsenko, W. Chan, M. Norouzi, and D. J. Fleet. Video diffusion models, 2022.
[33] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput., 9(8):1735–1780, nov 1997.
[34] A. Hu, L. Russell, H. Yeo, Z. Murez, G. Fedoseev, A. Kendall, J. Shotton, and G. Corrado. Gaia-1: A
     generative world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17080, 2023.


                                                       11
[35] S. Huang, Z. Wang, P. Li, B. Jia, T. Liu, Y. Zhu, W. Liang, and S.-C. Zhu. Diffusion-based generation,
     optimization, and planning in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition, pages 16750–16761, 2023.
[36] R. Hyndman, A. B. Koehler, J. K. Ord, and R. D. Snyder. Forecasting with Exponential Smoothing: The
     State Space Approach. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.
[37] M. Janner, Y. Du, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis.
     Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
[38] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret. Transformers are rnns: Fast autoregressive
     transformers with linear attention. CoRR, abs/2006.16236, 2020.
[39] L. Ke, J. Wang, T. Bhattacharjee, B. Boots, and S. Srinivasa. Grasping with chopsticks: Combating covariate
     shift in model-free imitation learning for fine manipulation. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on
     Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6185–6191. IEEE, 2021.
[40] D. Kingma and R. Gao. Understanding diffusion objectives as the elbo with simple data augmentation.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[41] R. G. Krishnan, U. Shalit, and D. Sontag. Structured inference networks for nonlinear state space models.
     In AAAI, 2017.
[42] G. Lai, W. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu. Modeling long- and short-term temporal patterns with deep neural
     networks. CoRR, abs/1703.07015, 2017.
[43] M. Laskey, J. Lee, R. Fox, A. Dragan, and K. Goldberg. Dart: Noise injection for robust imitation learning.
     In Conference on robot learning, pages 143–156. PMLR, 2017.
[44] X. L. Li, J. Thickstun, I. Gulrajani, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto. Diffusion-lm improves controllable text
     generation, 2022.
[45] H. Lütkepohl. New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis. Springer Science & Business Media,
     2005.
[46] J. E. Matheson and R. L. Winkler. Scoring rules for continuous probability distributions. Management
     Science, 22(10):1087–1096, 1976.
[47] A. Nichol and P. Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. CoRR, abs/2102.09672,
     2021.
[48] B. Peng, E. Alcaide, Q. Anthony, A. Albalak, S. Arcadinho, S. Biderman, H. Cao, X. Cheng, M. Chung,
     L. Derczynski, X. Du, M. Grella, K. Gv, X. He, H. Hou, P. Kazienko, J. Kocon, J. Kong, B. Koptyra,
     H. Lau, J. Lin, K. S. I. Mantri, F. Mom, A. Saito, G. Song, X. Tang, J. Wind, S. Woźniak, Z. Zhang,
     Q. Zhou, J. Zhu, and R.-J. Zhu. RWKV: Reinventing RNNs for the transformer era. In H. Bouamor,
     J. Pino, and K. Bali, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023,
     pages 14048–14077, Singapore, Dec. 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[49] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu. Exploring
     the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. CoRR, abs/1910.10683, 2019.
[50] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf. Autoregressive Denoising Diffusion Models for
     Multivariate Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
     on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2021.
[51] K. Rasul, A.-S. Sheikh, I. Schuster, U. M. Bergmann, and R. Vollgraf. Multivariate probabilistic time series
     forecasting via conditioned normalizing flows. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2021.
[52] D. Ruhe, J. Heek, T. Salimans, and E. Hoogeboom.             Rolling diffusion models.      arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2402.09470, 2024.
[53] T. Salimans and J. Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2202.00512,
     2022.
[54] D. Salinas, M. Bohlke-Schneider, L. Callot, R. Medico, J. Gasthaus, and R. Medico. High-dimensional
     multivariate forecasting with low-rank gaussian copula processes. In NeurIPS, 2019.
[55] D. Salinas, V. Flunkert, J. Gasthaus, and T. Januschowski. Deepar: Probabilistic forecasting with autore-
     gressive recurrent networks. International Journal of Forecasting, 36(3):1181–1191, 2020.
[56] D. Salinas, V. Flunkert, J. Gasthaus, and T. Januschowski. Deepar: Probabilistic forecasting with autore-
     gressive recurrent networks. International Journal of Forecasting, 36(3):1181–1191, 2020.
[57] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning using
     nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), 2015.
[58] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. CoRR, abs/2010.02502, 2020.


                                                       12
[59] B. Tang and D. S. Matteson. Probabilistic transformer for time series analysis. In A. Beygelzimer,
     Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     2021.
[60] H. Touvron, P. Bojanowski, M. Caron, M. Cord, A. El-Nouby, E. Grave, A. Joulin, G. Synnaeve, J. Verbeek,
     and H. Jégou. Resmlp: Feedforward networks for image classification with data-efficient training. CoRR,
     abs/2105.03404, 2021.
[61] A. Van den Oord, N. Kalchbrenner, L. Espeholt, O. Vinyals, A. Graves, et al. Conditional image generation
     with pixelcnn decoders. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
[62] R. van der Weide. Go-garch: A multivariate generalized orthogonal garch model. Journal of Applied
     Econometrics, 17(5):549–564, 2002.
[63] C. Wei, K. Mangalam, P.-Y. Huang, Y. Li, H. Fan, H. Xu, H. Wang, C. Xie, A. Yuille, and C. Feichtenhofer.
     Diffusion models as masked autoencoders. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
     Computer Vision, pages 16284–16294, 2023.
[64] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control using covariance
     variable importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01149, 2015.
[65] R. J. Williams and D. Zipser. A Learning Algorithm for Continually Running Fully Recurrent Neural
     Networks. Neural Computation, 1(2):270–280, 06 1989.
[66] T. Wu, Z. Fan, X. Liu, Y. Gong, Y. Shen, J. Jiao, H.-T. Zheng, J. Li, Z. Wei, J. Guo, N. Duan, and W. Chen.
     Ar-diffusion: Auto-regressive diffusion model for text generation, 2023.
[67] T. Wu, Z. Fan, X. Liu, H.-T. Zheng, Y. Gong, J. Jiao, J. Li, J. Guo, N. Duan, W. Chen, et al. Ar-diffusion:
     Auto-regressive diffusion model for text generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     36:39957–39974, 2023.
[68] T. Yan, H. Zhang, T. Zhou, Y. Zhan, and Y. Xia. Scoregrad: Multivariate probabilistic time series
     forecasting with continuous energy-based generative models, 2021.
[69] W. Yan, D. Hafner, S. James, and P. Abbeel. Temporally consistent transformers for video generation,
     2023.
[70] R. Yang, P. Srivastava, and S. Mandt. Diffusion probabilistic modeling for video generation. Entropy,
     25(10):1469, 2023.
[71] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. L. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and K. Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate
     problem solving with large language models, 2023.
[72] H. Yu, N. Rao, and I. S. Dhillon. Temporal regularized matrix factorization. CoRR, abs/1509.08333, 2015.




                                                       13
A     Theoretical Justification
In this section, we provide theoretical justification for the train of Diffusion Forcing. The main contributions can
be summarized as follows:

          • We show that our training methods optimize a reweighting of the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO)
            on the average log-likelihood of our data. We first establish this in full generality (Theorem A.1),
            and then specialize to the form of Gaussian diffusion (Corollary A.2). We show that the resulting
            terms decouple in such a fashion that, in the limit of a fully expressive latent and model, makes the
            reweighting terms immaterial.
          • We show that the expected likelihood over any distribution over sequences of noise levels can be lower
            bounded by a sum over nonnegative terms which, when reweighted, correspond to the terms optimized
            in the Diffusion Forcing training objective maximizes. Thus, for a fully expressive network that can
            drive all terms to their minimal value, Diffusion Forcing optimizes a valid surrogate of the likelihood
            of all sequences of noise levels simultaneously.

We begin by stating an ELBO for general Markov forward processes q(·), and generative models pθ (·), and then
specialize to Gaussian diffusion, thereby recovering our loss. We denote our Markov forward process q(·) as
                                                                  K
                                                                  Y
                                             q(x1:K | x0 ) =            q(xk | xk−1 ),                              (A.1)
                                                                  k=1

and a parameterized probability model
                                                 pθ (((xkt )1≤k≤K , zt )t≥1 )                                       (A.2)
We assume that pθ satisfies the Markov property that
                              pθ (zt , xkt t | z1:t−1 , (xks s )1≤s<t ) = pθ (zt , xkt | zt−1 )                     (A.3)
that is, the latent codes zt−1 is a sufficient statistic for xkt given the history. We say that pθ has deterministic
latents if pθ (zt | z1:t−1 , (xks s )1≤s<t , xkt t ) is a Dirac delta.
Remark 1. In order for pθ to have deterministic latents and correspond to a valid probability distribution, we
need to view the latents zt not as individual variables, but as a collection of variables zt (k1:t ) indexed by t ∈ [T ]
and the history of noise levels k1:t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K}t . In this case, simply setting zt (k1:t ) = (k1:t , (xks s )1≤s≤t
tautologically produces deterministic latents. The reason for indexing zt (k1:t ) with k1:t then arises because,
                                        k′
otherwise, pθ (zt | ((xks s )1≤s≤t , (xs s )1≤s≤t ) would be ill-defined unless ks = ks′ for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t, and thus,
pθ would not correspond to a joint probability measure. The exposition and theorem that follows allow zt (k1:t )
to be indexed on past noise levels k1:t but suppresses dependence on k1:t to avoid notational confusion.

A.1     Main Results
We can now state our main theorem, which provides an evidence lower bound (ELBO) on the expected log-
likelihood of partially-noised sequences (xkt t )1≤t≤T , under uniformly sampled levels kt and xkt t obtained by
noising according to q(·) as in (A.1). Notice that this formulation does not require an explicit for of q(·) or pθ ,
but we will specialize to Gaussian diffusion in the following section.
Theorem A.1. Fix x01:T . Define the expectation over the forward process with random noise level k1:T as
                                     E [·] :=            E              k     k
                                                                                  E      [·],                       (A.4)
                                forward                    unif     s     s  0
                                                 k1 ,...,kT ∼ [K] xs ∼q(xs |xs ),1≤s≤T

and the expectation over the latents under pθ (·) conditioned on k1:T , (xks t )1≤t≤T as
                                                              h                          i
                            E [·] :=              E             · | k1:T , (xkt t )1≤t≤T                            (A.5)
                            p,z1:T                            k
                                             zs ∼p(zs |zs−1 ,xs s ),s≤T

Then, as long as pθ satisfies the Markov property,
    E [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )] ≥ C(x01:T )
forward
                     " T                                     K
                                                                                                                              !#
                      X      1                              X     j                                                     
+     E       E                 ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +          DKL q(xj−1
                                                                            t   | xjt , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xtj−1 , zt−1 )           ,
    forward p,z1:T
                     t=1
                           K +1                             j=2
                                                                K +1

where C(x01:T ) is a constant depending only on x01:T (the unnoised data). Moreover, if the latents are deter-
ministic (i.e. pθ (zt | zt−1 , xkt t ) is a Dirac distribution), then the inequality holds with inequality if and only if
q(xkt t +1:T | xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ), i.e. the variational approximation is exact.


                                                               14
The proof of the above theorem is given in Appendix A.2. Remarkably, it involves only two inequalities! The
first holds with equality under deterministic latents and the second holds if and only if variational approximation
is exact: q(xtkt +1:T | xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ). This tightness of the ELBO suggests that the expression
in Theorem A.1 is a relatively strong surrogate objective for optimizing the likelihoods.

A.1.1      Specializing to Gaussian diffusion
We now special Theorem A.1 to Gaussian diffusion. For now, we focus on the “x-prediction” formulation of
diffusion, which is the one used in our implementation. The “ϵ-prediction” formalism, used throughout the
main body of the text, can be derived similarly (see Section 2 of [7] for a clean exposition). The following
theorem follows directly by apply standard likelihood and KL-divergence computations for the DDPM [29, 7] to
Theorem A.1.
Corollary A.2. Let
                                                          p
                                  q(xk+1 | xkt ) = N (xk ; 1 − βk xk−1 , βk I),                              (A.6)
                                         Qk                                                 j      j+1
and define αk = (1 − βk ), ᾱk =            j=1 αj . Suppose that we parameterize pθ (xt | xt          , zt−1 ) =
           j+1            2
N (µθ (xt , zt−1 , j), σj ), where further,
                                  √                   √                                                  √
                      (1 − ᾱj−1 ) αj j (1 − αj ) ᾱj−1                                  (1 − αj )(1 − ᾱj−1 )
µθ (xjt , zt−1 , j) =                 xt +                  x̂θ (xjt , zt−1 , j), σj2 :=                         .
                          1 − ᾱj                 1 − ᾱj                                       1 − ᾱj
Then, as long as pθ satisfies the Markov property, we obtained
                                                         " T                  K
                                                                                                                        #
                                                          X              j X
                kt                  0
  E [ln pθ ((xt )1≤t≤T )] + C(x1:T ) ≥ E            E                            cj ∥x̂0θ (xjt , zt−1 , j) − x0t ∥2
forward                                           forward p,z1:T
                                                                   t=1
                                                                       K + 1 j=1
                                                                   " T                                                            #
                                                                    X
                                              =      E      E            1{kt ≥ 1} · kt ckt ∥x̂0θ (xkt t , zt−1 , kt ) − x0t ∥2       ,
                                                  forward p,z1:T
                                                                   t=1

                                 (1−αj )2 ᾱj−1
where above, we define cj =       2σ 2 (1−ᾱj )2
                                                 .

Proof. The first inequality follows from the standard computations for the “x-prediction” formulation of
Diffusion (see Section 2.7 of [7] and references therein). The second follows by replacing the sum over j with
                       unif
an expectation over kt ∼ {0, 1, . . . , K}.

We make a couple of remarks:

          • As noted above, Corollary A.2 can also be stated for ϵ-prediction, or the so-called “v-prediction”
            formalism, as all are affinely related.
          • Define an idealized latent z̃t−1 consisting of all past tokens (xkt t ) as well as of their noise lev-
            els kt . This is a sufficient statistic for zt−1 , and thus we can always view x̂0θ (xkt t , zt−1 , kt ) =
            x̂0θ (xkt t , z̄t−1 , kt ), where zt−1 is just compressing z̄t−1 . When applying the expectation of x1:T ∼ q
            to both sides of the bound in Corollary A.2, and taking an infimum over possible function approximator
            x̂0θ , we obtain
               inf E    E      E ∥x̂0θ (xkt t , zt−1 , kt ) − x0t ∥2 = inf E E              E ∥x̂0θ (xkt t , z̄t−1 ) − x0t ∥2
                pθ q forward p,z1:T                                        pθ q forward p,z1:T

                                                                     = Varq [x0t | (xks s )1≤s≤t , k1 , . . . , kt ].
            This leads to a striking finding: with expressive enough latents and pθ , we can view the maximization
            of each term in Corollary A.2 separately across time steps. The absence of this coupling means that
            the weighting terms are immaterial to the optimization, and thus can be ignored.
          • Given the above remarks, we can optimize the ELBO by taking gradients through the objective
            specified by Corollary A.2, and are free to drop any weighting terms (or rescale them) as desired.
            Backpropagation through Ep,z1:T is straightforward due to deterministic latents. This justifies the
            correctness of our training objective (3.1) and protocol Algorithm 1.

A.1.2      Capturing all subsequences
Theorem A.1 stipulates that, up to reweighting, the Diffusion Forcing objective optimizes a valid ELBO on
the expected log-likelihoods over uniformly sampled noise levels. The following theorem can be obtained by
a straightforward modification of the proof of Theorem A.1 generalizes this to arbitrary (possibly temporally
correlated) sequences of noise.


                                                             15
Theorem A.3. Let D be an arbitrary distribution over [K]T , and define Pt (j | k1:t−1 ) := PrD [kt = j | k1:t−1 ].
Fix x01:T . Define the expectation over the forward process with random noise level k1:T as

                                       E        [·] :=          E                          E                   [·],                           (A.7)
                                 forward,D                k1 ,...,kT ∼D xks ∼q(xks |x0 ),1≤s≤T
                                                                             s         s       s


and the expectation over the latent under pθ (·) conditioned on k1:T , (xks t )1≤t≤T as
                                                              h                          i
                            E [·] :=              E             · | k1:T , (xkt t )1≤t≤T                                                      (A.8)
                              p,z1:T                                 k
                                               zs ∼p(zs |zs−1 ,xs s ),s≤T

Then, as long as pθ satisfies the Markov property,
                                                                                   " T             #
                                                                                    X
    E       [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )] ≥ C(x01:T ) +              E            E              Ξt , where
forward,D                                                  forward,D p,z1:T
                                                                                     t=1
                                                             K
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                             X                                                                                               
Ξt :=    Pt (1 | k1:t−1 ) ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +               jPt (j | k1:t−1 )DKL                   q(xj−1
                                                                                                              t   | xjt , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj−1
                                                                                                                                             t   , zt−1 )             ,
                                                             j=2

where C(x01:T ) is a constant depending only on x01:T (the noise-free data), and where the inequality is an
equality under the conditions that (a) pθ (zt | zt−1 , xkt t ) is a Dirac distribution (deterministic latents), and (b)
q(xkt t +1:T | xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ), i.e. the variational approximation is sharp.
In particular, in the Gaussian case of Corollary A.2, we have
                                                                                   " T                                                                #
                                                                                    X
   E        [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )] + C(x01:T ) ≥              E          E                1{kt ≥ 1}kt ckt ∥x̂0θ (xkt t , zt−1 , kt ) − x0t ∥2           ,
forward,D                                                 forward,D p,z1:T
                                                                                     t=1


The most salient case for us is the restriction of D to fixed sequences of noise k1 , . . . , kT (i.e. Dirac distributions
on [K]T ). In this case, Pt (j | k1:t−1 ) = 0 for all but j = kt , and thus our training objective need not be a lower
bound on Eforward,D [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )]. However, the terms in the lower bound are, up to reweighting, an
subset of those terms optimized in the training objective. Thus, in light of the remarks following Corollary A.2,
a fully expressive network can optimize all the terms in the loss simultaneously. We conclude that, for a
fully expressive neural network, optimizing the training objective (3.1) is a valid surrogate for maximizing the
likelihood of all possible noise sequences.

A.2     Proof of Theorem A.1

Define E<t [·] as shorthand for E unif Exks ∼q(xks |x0 ),1≤s≤t−1 Ezs ∼p(zs |z ,xks ),s≤t [·]. We begin with
                                 k1:s ∼ [K] s   s    s                       s−1 s
the following claim
Claim 1 (Expanding the latents). The following lower bound holds:
                                                   T
                                                   X                                                            h                        i
               E [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )] ≥                E             E                         Ek               ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 ) ,   (A.9)
             forward                                      <t      unif             t    kt  0
                                                   t=1          kt ∼ {0,1,...,K} xt ∼q(xt |xt )


Moreover, this lower bound holds with equality if zs ∼ p(zs | zs−1 , xks s ) is a Dirac distribution (i.e., determin-
istic latents).

Proof. Let’s fix a sequence k1:T . It holds that
                                       Z        T
                                                Y
               pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T ) =                  p(xkt t , zt | (xks s , zs )s<t )
                                           z1:T t=1
                                       Z        T
                                                Y
                                  =                   p(xkt t , zt | zt−1 )                                                      (Markov Property)
                                           z1:T t=1
                                       Z           T
                                                   Y
                                  =                       p(zt | zt−1 , xkt t )pθ (xkt t | zt−1 )
                                           z1:T (k) t=1

                                                                         T
                                                                         Y
                                  =                   E                          pθ (xkt t | zt−1 ).                        (Importance Sampling)
                                                            k
                                       zs ∼p(zs |zs−1 ,xs s ),s≤T t=1




                                                                      16
Thus, by Jensen’s inequality,
                                                                             T
                                                                                                                      " T                             #
                                                                             X                                         X
    ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T ) ≥                          E                          ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 ) =       E              ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 )       ,
                                                            k
                                         zs ∼p(zs |zs−1 ,xs s ),s≤T t=1                                      p,z1:T
                                                                                                                        t=1

where the inequality is and equality when pθ (zs | zs−1 , xks s ) is a Dirac distribution. By applying Eforward to
both sides of the above display, and invoking the Markov property of the latents, we conclude that
                                                     " T                          #
                          kt
                                                       X               kt
            E [ln pθ ((xt )1≤t≤T )] ≥ E           E          ln pθ (xt | zt−1 )
           forward                                          forward p,z1:T
                                                                                      t=1
                                                                T
                                                                X                                                  h                        i
                                                            =            E            E                 Ek             ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 ) .
                                                                         <t     unif             t k   t  0
                                                                t=1           kt ∼ {0,1,...,K} xt ∼q(xt |xt )




We now unpack the terms obtained from the preceding claim.
Claim 2 (ELBO w.r.t. q). It holds that
                                                                                            "                              #
                               h                            i                                        pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
                   Ek              ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 )        ≥ C1 (x0 , kt ) +         Ek :K ln                           .
          k
        xt t ∼q(xt t |x0
                       t)
                                                                                   k :K
                                                                                  xt t  ∼q(xt t |x0
                                                                                                  t)
                                                                                                     q(xkt t +1:K | x0t )
where C1 (x0 , kt ) is a constant depending only on x0 and kt , and where the inequality holds with equality if
and only if q(xkt t +1:T | xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ).

Proof. We have that
                                     h                           i
                        Ek               ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 )
               k
              xt t ∼q(xt t |x0
                             t)
                                            Z                                  
              =           Ek                ln pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )dxkt t +1:K
                    k
                   xt t ∼q(xt t |x0
                                  t)
                                           "                                                      !#
                                                                        pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
                                                                                        
         =         Ek           ln                  Ek +1:K k                 kt +1:K
             k
            xt t ∼q(xt t |x0
                           t)
                                        k +1:K
                                      xt t     ∼q(xt t         |xt t ) q(xt             | xkt t )
                              "                                                               #
                                                                      pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
                                                                
         ≥         Ek                         Ek +1:K k ln                                                ((Jensen’s inequality))
             k
            xt t ∼q(xt t |x0
                           t ) xt
                                  kt +1:K
                                           ∼q(xt t      |xt t )       q(xkt t +1:K | xkt t )
                                         pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
                                                                
         =           E                ln                                                               (Markov property of q(·))
             k :K
            xt t
                         k :K
                   ∼q(xt t    |x0t)
                                         q(xtkt +1:K | xkt t )
                              "                                                     #
                                                           pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
         = C1 (x0 , kt ) +                 Ek :K ln                                   ,
                                  k :K
                                xt t   ∼q(xt t     |x0
                                                     t)
                                                            q(xkt t +1:K | x0t )
                                                                             k +1:K
                                                                                             
                                                                          q(xt t      |x0 t)
where the constant C1 (x0 , kt ) = Exkt :K ∼q(xkt :K |x0 ) ln                 kt +1:K    kt      depends only on x0 and kt . To
                                                        t                t        t         q(xt       |xt )

check the conditions for equality, note that if q(xkt t +1:T | xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ), then
                                  pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
                                                                                                                h                                 i
                                                                       kt                                                    kt +1:K            kt
           E                   ln     k  +1:K       k
                                                            = ln p θ (xt | zt−1 ) +            E                    ln p θ (xt       | z t−1 , xt )
 k +1:K
xt t
             k +1:K
        ∼q(xt t
                       k
                     |xt t )      q(xt t         | xt t )                            k +1:K
                                                                                    xt t
                                                                                                  k +1:K
                                                                                            ∼q(xt t
                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                          |xt t )
                                                                     h                   i
Since ln(·) is strictly concave, Exkt +1:K ∼q(xkt +1:K |xkt ) ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 ) = 0 if and only if pθ (xkt t +1:K |
                                                  t                  t            t
zt−1 , xkt t ) = q(xkt t +1:K | xkt t ).
Claim 3 (Computing the expected ELBO).
                               pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
          E               ln
 k :K
xt t
          k :K
      ∼q(xt t  |x0
                 t)
                               q(xkt t +1:K | x0t )
                                                                                 K−1
                                                                                 X                                                                 
= C3 (x0 , kt ) + 1{kt = 0} ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +                                 1{j ≥ kt }DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                               t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                                                        t   , zt−1 ) ,
                                                                                 j=1

where C2 (x0 , kt ) is some other constant depending on x0 and kt .


                                                                                  17
Proof. The proof invokes similar manipulations to the standard ELBO derivation for diffusion, but with a few
careful modifications to handle the fact that we only noise to level kt . As is standard, we require the identity
                                                                                          q(xjt | x0t )
                                         q(xjt | xj−1
                                                  t   , x0t ) = q(xj−1
                                                                   t   | xjt , x0t ) ·                    .                            (A.10)
                                                                                         q(xj−1
                                                                                            t     | x0t )

Part 1: Expanding the likelihood ratios . Using the above identity, we obtain
     pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
ln
     q(xkt t +1:K | x0t )
                                                          K
                        pθ (xkt t | xkt t +1 , zt−1 )    X          pθ (xj−1  | xjt , zt−1 )
= ln p(xK
        t | zt−1 ) + ln                               +         ln       t
                            q(xt  kt +1       0
                                          | xt )        j=kt +2
                                                                      q(xt | xj−1
                                                                          j
                                                                               t     , x0t )
                                                          K
                        pθ (xkt t | xkt t +1 , zt−1 )     X  pθ (xj−1 | xj , zt−1 )                  q(xj−1   | x0t )
                                                                                                                       
(i)
= ln p(xK
        t | zt−1 ) + ln                               +            ln       t         t
                                                                                                 + ln    t
                             q(xkt t +1 | x0t )         j=kt +2
                                                                        q(xj−1
                                                                            t    | xjt , xkt t )       q(xjt | x0t )
                                                                                                   K−1
(ii)                                    pθ (xkt t | xkt t +1 , zt−1 )      q(xkt t +1 | xkt t )    X         pθ (xjt | xj+1  , zt−1 )
 = ln p(xK
         t | zt−1 ) + ln                          kt +1
                                                                      + ln              k
                                                                                                +         ln       j
                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                          j+1
                                            q(xt          | x0t )           q(xK t  | x t
                                                                                          t
                                                                                            )     j=kt +1
                                                                                                              q(x  t  | x t   , x0t )
                                                            K−1
       ln p(xK
             t | zt−1 )             kt    kt +1
                                                            X         pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                 t   , zt−1 )
=                 kt
                        + ln p θ (x t  | xt     , zt−1 ) +         ln       j    j+1
             K
         q(xt | xt )                                       j=kt +1
                                                                       q(xt | xt , x0t )
                                                                                           K−1
                                     p(xK
                                          t | zt−1 )      pθ (xkt t | xkt t +1 , zt−1 )    X         pθ (xjt | xj+1  , zt−1 )
= ln q(xkt t | xkt t +1 )1{kt ≥1} + ln          kt
                                                     + ln     kt      kt +1 1{kt ≥1}
                                                                                        +         ln       j
                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                  j+1
                                                                                                                              ,
                                           K
                                       q(xt | xt )        q(xt | xt          )            j=kt +1
                                                                                                      q(x  t  | x t   , x0t )

where (i) uses A.10, (ii) invokes a cancellation in the telescoping sum, and the final display follows from the
computation
                                                       (
                               kt    kt +1 1{kt ≥1}       1                    kt = 0
                            q(xt | xt     )          =                                 .                       (A.11)
                                                          q(xkt t | xkt t +1 ) kt ≥ 1
                                                                                                  ln p(xK
                                                                                             
                                                                          kt   kt +1 1{kt ≥1}           t |zt−1 )
Observe that, because we don’t parameterize p(xK  t | zt−1 ), ln q(xt | xt          )           +       K   kt    can
                                                                                                                        q(xt |xt )
be regarded as some constant C ′ (xkt t , xkt t +1 , xK
                                                      t ). Thus,

                                                                                                  K−1
       pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )                                     pθ (xkt t | xkt t +1 , zt−1 )    X         pθ (xjt | xj+1  , zt−1 )
ln         kt +1:K
                             = C ′ (xkt t , xkt t +1 , xK
                                                        t ) + ln     kt      kt +1 1{kt ≥1}
                                                                                               +         ln       j
                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                         j+1
       q(xt              0
                      | xt )                                     q(xt | xt          )            j=kt +1
                                                                                                             q(x  t  | x t   , x0t )
                                                                                                                              (A.12)

Part 2: Taking expecations. We can now simplify to taking expectations. Observe that
                                             pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                        t   , zt−1 )       
                                                                               j    j+1     0           j    j+1
                                                                                                                          
                     Ek :K              ln         j    j+1
                                                                     = D KL q(xt | xt   , x t ) ∥ p θ (xt | xt   , z t−1 ) ,
            k :K
           xt t    ∼q(xt t       |x0
                                   t)
                                              q(xt | xt , x0t )
and similarly,
                                                                           (x0t | x1t , zt−1 )
                                                                  (
                       pθ (xkt t | xkt t +1 , zt−1 )                  ln pθ                                                            kt = 0
        E           ln                               =                                                                             
 k :K
xt t
          k :K
      ∼q(xt t  |x0     q(xkt t | xkt t +1 )1{kt ≥1}                   DKL q(xkt t | xkt t +1 , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xkt t | xj+1
                                                                                                                    t   , zt−1 )        kt ≥ 1.
                 t)


Finally, Exkt :K ∼q(xkt :K |x0 ) C ′ (xkt t , xkt t +1 , xK
                                                          t ) is a constant C2 (kt , x0 ) depending only on kt , x0 . Thus,
           t         t       t
from (A.12)
                                 pθ (xkt t :K | zt−1 )
            Ek :K           ln
 k :K
xt t     ∼q(xt t     |x0
                       t)
                                 q(xkt t +1:K | x0t )
                                                                              K−1
                                                                              X                                                          
= C2 (kt , x0 ) + 1{kt = 0} ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +                                DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                    t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                                             t   , zt−1 )
                                                                        j=max{1,kt }
                                                                        K−1
                                                                        X                                                                 
= C2 (kt , x0 ) + 1{kt = 0} ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +                        1{j ≥ kt }DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                      t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                                               t   , zt−1 ) .
                                                                         j=1




                                                                         18
Completing the proof of the ELBO. We are now ready to complete the proof. By combining the previous
two claims, we have
              h                       i
      E         ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 )
 k         k
xt t ∼q(xt t |x0
               t)

                                                                          K−1
                                                                          X                                                                
     ≥ C3 (x0 , kt ) + 1{kt = 0} ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +                    1{j ≥ kt }DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                       t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                                                t   , zt−1 ) ,
                                                                          j=1

where C3 (x0 , kt ) = C1 (x0 , kt ) + C2 (x0 , kt ) and where again, the above is an equality when q(xkt t +1:T |
                                                                                      unif
xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ). Taking an expectation over kt ∼ {0, 1, . . . , K}, we have
                                                                 1                                            j+1
                                 E           [1{kt = 0}] =          ,                 E        1{j ≥ kt } =        .        (A.13)
                          unif
                        kt ∼ {0,1,...,K}
                                                               K +1            unif
                                                                            kt ∼ {0,1,...,K}
                                                                                                              K +1

and consequently,
           E                             E            ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )
   unif             t     k
                          t  0       k
 kt ∼ {0,1,...,K} xt ∼q(xt |xt ),1≤t≤T
                                                           K−1
                            1                              X j+1                                                     
     ≥ C4 (x0t ) +             ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +          DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                 t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                          t   , zt−1 )
                          K +1                             j=1
                                                               K +1

Invoking Claim 1,
     E [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )]
forward
     T
     X                                                  h                      i
≥          E              E                   Ek         ln pθ (xkt t | zt−1 )
           <t     unif             t     k
                                         t  0
     t=1        kt ∼ {0,1,...,K} xt ∼q(xt |xt )
     T
                "                                                 K−1
                                                                                                                                        #
     X                             1                              X   j+1                                                    
=          E C4 (x0t ) +              ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +          DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                        t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                                 t   , zt−1 )
     t=1
           <t                    K +1                             j=1
                                                                      K +1

We conclude by observing that Tt=1 E<t C4 (x0t ) is a constant C(x01:T ), and that
                             P                       

                   E ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) = E             E ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 )
                                                                                           
                   <t                                forward p,z1:T
                      h                                                         i
                   E DKL q(xjt | xj+1   t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                   t    , zt−1 )
                   <t
                                   h                                                         i
                   = E         E DKL q(xjt | xj+1        t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                    t , zt−1 ) ,
                                     forward p,z1:T

since both terms only depend on k1:t−1 , (xks s )1≤s≤t−1 and z1:t−1 . We conclude then that

     E [ln pθ ((xkt t )1≤t≤T )] ≥ C(x01:T )
forward
                         " T                                          K−1
                                                                                                                                            !#
                          X            1                              X j+1                                                      
+      E            E                     ln pθ (x0t | x1t , zt−1 ) +          DKL q(xjt | xj+1
                                                                                            t   , x0t ) ∥ pθ (xjt | xj+1
                                                                                                                     t   , zt−1 )                ,
     forward p,z1:T
                           t=1
                                     K +1                             j=1
                                                                          K +1

as needed. Lastly, we recall that the above is an equality under the conditions that
(a) pθ (zt | zt−1 , xkt t ) is a Dirac distribution, and (b) q(xkt t +1:T | xkt t ) ≡ pθ (xkt t +1:T | xkt t , zt−1 ), and we
reindex j ← j + 1 to ensure consistency with indexing in standard expositions of the diffusion ELBO.



B      Additional Intuitions and Explainations

B.1     Extension to transformer backbone
While this paper focuses on a causal implementation of Diffusion Forcing with RNNs, it’s easy to adopt
Diffusion Forcing with modern architectures like transformers. One can simply modify a transformer-based
sequence diffusion model to train with independent noise levels across tokens and follow the techniques listed in
Section D.1. A strict implementation of causal Diffusion Forcing would involve a causal attention mask on the
transformer. However, Diffusion Forcing’s fractional masking can do something more interesting: Consider
the scenario that we use a transformer without a causal mask. We can still implement causality by controlling


                                                                       19
noise. By labeling the future as full white noise, there is no information leaked into the past tokens. By labeling
future tokens as free of noise, we make the model completely non-causal. By labeling the future tokens as noisy,
a slight amount of information about the future is provided for the prediction of past tokens. This effectively
states that one only needs a non-causal architecture, but controlling fractional noise of the future, to achieve
partial or complete causality. These extensions are beyond the scope of this paper, but we already verified their
effectiveness and thus provide them as intuitions for future works.

B.2    The need for independent noise levels
When training Diffusion Forcing, we choose to sample per-token noise level following i.i.d uniform distribution
from [1, 2...K]. One may wonder about the necessity of this choice. Here we discuss the unique abilities of
independent noise and the compute overhead added by it.
The use of independent noise confers a number of special capabilities in our model, including stabilization of
autoregressive rollout 3.3, modeling causal uncertainty 3.3, and removing the need for expensive reconstruction
guidance when conditioning on context B.6. None of these capabilities can be achieved by full-sequence
diffusion. AR-diffusion [67] and Rolling Diffusion [52] can only achieve the first and third one. There are more
sampling-time applications such as flexible frame interpolation. Finally, we also saw the practical benefits of
using independent noise in hyperparameter tuning. One can simply try different sampling schemes to figure
out the most effective one for their applications. All these capabilities only require training the model once
with Diffusion Forcing. In contrast, any tuning of the sampling scheme would require re-training the model for
AR-diffusion and Rolling Diffusion.
On the other hand, we didn’t observe much computing overhead when comparing Diffusion Forcing to full-
sequence diffusion, as soon as one closely follows our training techniques like D.1. The empirical evidence is
based on our experiments with an experimental transformer implementation of Diffusion Forcing and is thus not
fully consistent with the main paper. However, we present the high-level descriptions below for readers interested
in more insights: The complexity added by independent noise levels is in the temporal dimension. Therefore, we
first adopt a standard technique for video diffusion models - image pre-training, to abstract away the complexity
of the image pixels themselves. Then the complexity left is temporal prediction only. We then take the pre-trained
image-only model and continue training it on video data. It turns out the sampling result of Diffusion Forcing
with fewer training steps in this second stage is already better than that of full-sequence diffusion at convergence.
We speculate that the better result is due to the same data-augmentation effect described in prior works [40]. This
shows that the overhead added by independent noise is well-warranted when considering the overall training
compute (including image pre-training).

B.3    Guidance as planning

As stated in Section 2, one can use the gradient of the logarithmic of a classifier log c(y|xkt ) to guide the
sampling process of diffusion model towards samples with a desired attribute y. For example, y can refer to the
indicator of a success event. However, we can consider the logarithmic of a more general energy function c(xkt ).
                                                                         k
This has the interpretation as Pr y|xkt , where Pr y = 1 | xkt = ec(xt ) . Some popular candidate energies
                                                               
include                                           "                    #
                                                             kt′
                                          k
                                                    X                k
                                       c(xt ) = E       r′ (xt′ ) | xt ,                                  (B.1)
                                                        t′ >t
corresponding to a cost-to-go; we can obtain unbiased estimates of this gradient by using cumulative reward
                      k ′
c̃(xkt ) = t′ >t r′ (xt′t ). We can also use goal distance c = −∥xkTT − g∥2 as a terminal reward. We provide
          P
details about the guidance function deployed in the maze2d planning experiment in Appendix D.5.

B.4    Noising and stabilizing long-horizon generations
Here, we explain in detail how we use noising to stabilize long-horizon generation. At each time t, during
                                           ksmall
the denoising, we maintain a latent zt−1          from the previous time step, with 0 < ksmall ≪ K corresponding
to some small amount of noise. We then do next token diffusion to diffuse the token xt across noise levels
       K−1
xKt , xt   , . . . , x0t (corresponding to Algorithm 2 with horizon T = 1, initial latent zkt−1 , and noise schedule
                                                           K−1
Km,1 = m); this process also produces latents zK      t , zt   , . . . , z0t associated with each noise level. From these,
                        ksmall
we use the latent zt           to repeat the process. This noised latent can be interpreted as an implementation of
                       k
conditioning on xt small in an autoregressive process. In a potential transformer implementation of Diffusion
Forcing as we discussed in Appendix B.1, one can instead run a forward diffusion on a fully diffused token to
achieve stabilization.
It is widely appreciated that adding noise to data ameliorates long-term compounding error in behavior cloning
applications [39, 43], and even induces robustness to non-sequential adversarial attacks [13]. In autoregressive


                                                           20
                                             Sample multiple
                                             futures to compute
                                             guidance gradient
                 Corrupted History:                                              Classifier guidance on
                                             for 𝑥+, , allowing
                 Set 𝑘 ∈ 0, 𝐾 so                                                 𝑥- can propagate
                                             planning with
                 model cautiously                                                through the trajectory
                                             expected reward
                 treats 𝑥+, as noisy                                             because near future
                 observation.                                                    hasn’t been fully
                                                                                 diffused




                                                                               Far future:
              History:                                                         Loop 𝑘 from K…0 while
              Set 𝑘 = 0 so               Near future:                          staying bigger than the
              model trusts 𝑥+, as        Loop 𝑘 from K…0                       𝑘 of near future. Model
              GT observation to          so model diffuses                     diffuses 𝑥+, conditioned
              condition on.              𝑥+, as prediction.                    on partially diffused
                                                                               near future.


Figure 5: Diffusion Forcing is trained on independent level of noises at different timesteps. As a
result, we can control the noise level k to achieve different effects on conditioning and prediction.


                                    k
video generation, the noised xt small is in-distribution for training, because Diffusion Forcing trains from noisy
past observation in its training objective. Hence, this method can be interpreted as a special case of the DART
algorithm for behavior cloning [43], where the imitiator (in our case, video generator) is given actions (in
our case, next video frames) from noisy observations (in our case, noised previous frames). Somewhat more
precisely, because we use both tokens at training time to train Diffusion Forcing, and using slightly noised tokens
for autoregression at test time, our approach inherits the theoretical guarantee of the HINT algorithm [5].


B.5    Why Monte Carlo Guidance relies on Diffusion Forcing

Monte Carlo Guidance provides substantial variance reduction in our estimate of cost-to-go guidance (B.1). This
technique crucially relies on the ability to roll out future tokens from current ones to use these sample rollouts to
get Monte Carlo estimates for gradients. This is not feasible with full-sequence diffusion, because this requires
denoising all tokens in tandem; thus, for a given fixed noise level, there is no obvious source of randomness to
use for the Monte Carlo estimate. It may be possible to achieve variable horizon via the trick proposed in the
following subsection to simulate future rollouts, but to our knowledge, this approach is nonstandard.


B.6    Does the replacement technique lead to flexible horizons in full-sequence diffusion?

A naive way to obtain flexible horizon generation in full-sequence diffusion is via the “replacement trick”:
consider a full sequence model trained to diffuse x1:T , which we partition into x1:t−1 , xt:T ]. Having diffused
tokens x1:t−1 , we can attempt to denoise tokens of the form [x̃k1:t−1 , xkt:T ], where we fix x̃k1:t−1 = x1:t−1
to be the previously generated token, and only have score gradients update the remaining xkt:T . One clear
disadvantage of this method is inefficiency - one still needs to diffuse the whole sequence even when there is one
step left at t = T − 1. What’s more, [32] points out that this approach of conditioning, named “conditioning
by replacement”, is both mathematically unprincipled and can lead to inconsistency in the generated sequence.
The best fix proposed by [32] incorporates an additional gradient term with respect to xt:T at every diffusion
step; this is still an incomplete fix and suffers the computation cost of an extra backward propagation for every
sampling step.


B.7    Further connection to Bayesian filtering

The core idea of Diffusion Forcing can be interpreted as using diffusion to construct an interpolation between
prior distribution and posterior distribution of a Bayes filter. Consider the hybrid distribution p(zt |zt−1 , xkt ).
When k = 0, this hybrid distribution becomes the posterior p(zt |zt−1 , xt ). On the other hand, when k = K,
the hybrid distribution becomes p(zt |zt−1 , n) for n ∼ N (0, I). Since the independent Gaussian noise term n
contains no information about z, this is exactly the prior distribution p(zt |zt−1 ). By varying k between K and
0, the same neural network can parameterize everything between prior and posterior.


                                                         21
B.8    Connection to other sequence training schemes
Noise as masking provides a unified view of different sequence training schemes. The following exposition uses
a length 3 sequence as an example: We always start with fully masked sequence [xK           K    K
                                                                                       1 , x2 , x3 ] with the goal
                                                     0   0    0
of denoising it a “clean sequence” of zero noise. [x1 , x2 , x3 ]. Assume all diffusions are sampled with 3-step
DDIM.
Autoregressive. In teacher forcing, one trains a model to predict the next token conditioned on prior observa-
tions. One can train next-token diffusion models with teacher forcing such as [50]: feed neural network with
past observations as well as a current observation and ask it to predict clean current observation. A typical
                                                     ⊤                          0 ⊤
training pair can have the input of [x01 , x02 , xK                   0    0
                                                  3 ] and target of [x1 , x2 , x3 ] .

At sampling time, one fully diffuses the next token before adding the diffused observation to history to perform
an autoregressive rollout. The diffusion process would thus look like
                                                              K ⊤
                                                  [xK    K
                                                    1 , x2 , x3 ]
                                                      K//2            K ⊤
                                                  [x1         , xK
                                                                 2 , x3 ] ,
                                                               K ⊤
                                                  [x01 , xK
                                                          2 , x3 ] ,
                                                           K//2           ⊤
                                                  [x01 , x2         , xK
                                                                       3 ]
                                                                   ⊤
                                                  [x01 , x02 , xK
                                                                3 ] ,
                                                                 K//2 ⊤
                                                  [x01 , x02 , x3         ] ,
                                                  [x01 , x02 , x03 ]⊤ .
Notably, Diffusion Forcing can also perform this sampling scheme at sampling time for applications like imitation
learning, when one wants to diffuse the next action as fast as possible.
Full Sequence Diffusion. Full sequence diffusion models accept a noisy sequence and denoises level-by-level
                                                          K ⊤
                                              [xK    K
                                                1 , x2 , x3 ]
                                                 K//2       K//2          K//2 ⊤
                                              [x1       , x2          , x3       ] ,
                                              [x01 , x02 , x03 ]⊤ .
Notably, Diffusion Forcing can also perform this sampling scheme at sampling time.
Diffusion Forcing with causal uncertainty As shown in Figure 2, to model causal uncertainty, Diffusion
Forcing keeps the far future more uncertain than the near future by having a larger noise level k, at any time of
diffusion. An example pattern looks like this:
                                                              K ⊤
                                                  [xK    K
                                                    1 , x2 , x3 ]
                                                      K//2            K ⊤
                                                  [x1         , xK
                                                                 2 , x3 ] ,
                                                           K//2           ⊤
                                                  [x01 , x2         , xK
                                                                       3 ] ,
                                                                 K//2 ⊤
                                                  [x01 , x02 , x3         ]
                                                  [x01 , x02 , x03 ]⊤
Notable, [66] is the first one to propose such a linear uncertainty sampling scheme for causal diffusion models,
although Diffusion Forcing provides a generalization of such scheme in combination with other abilities.
Diffusion Forcing with stablization Previously we introduced the autoregressive sampling scheme that
Diffusion Forcing can also do. However, such a scheme can accumulate single-step errors because it treats
predicted x as ground truth observation. Diffusion Forcing addresses this problem by telling the model that
generated images should be treated as noisy ground truth, as shown in 2.
It first fully diffuses the first token,
                                                              K ⊤
                                                  [xK    K
                                                    1 , x2 , x3 ]
                                                      K//2            K ⊤
                                                  [x1         , xK
                                                                 2 , x3 ] ,
                                                               K ⊤
                                                  [x01 , xK
                                                          2 , x3 ]



Then, it feed the diffused x01 into the model but tell it is of a slightly higher noise level, as x11 to diffuse x2 .
                                                            K//2             ⊤
                                                    [x11 , x2         , xK
                                                                         3 ]
                                                                      ⊤
                                                    [x11 , x02 , xK
                                                                  3 ]




                                                                22
Then, it feeds the diffused x02 into the model but tells it is of a higher noise level, as x12 .

                                                                K//2 ⊤
                                                  [x11 , x12 , x3         ] ,
                                                  [x11 , x12 , x03 ]⊤ .


C     Extended Related Work

Reconstructing masked tokens. Masked Autoencoders for images [27] and videos [17] are a popular
method for representation learning in pixel space. They have been extended to perform diffusion to generate
masked patches conditioned on unmasked ones [63, 19].
Casting Image Generation as Sequence Generation. [61, 8] show that even generative modeling of
non-sequential data, such as images, can be fruitfully cast as sequence generative modeling.
Non-Diffusion Probabilistic Sequence Models. [12] parameterize token-to-token transitions via a vari-
ational auto-encoder. This makes them probabilistic, but does not directly maximize the joint probability of
sequences, but rather, enables sampling from the distribution of single-step transitions.
Sequence Diffusion with Varying Noise Levels. Most similar to our work is AR-Diffusion [66] which
similarly aims to train next-token prediction models for sequence diffusion. Key differences are that AR-
Diffusion proposes a noise level that is linearly dependent on the position of each word in the sequence, while
our critical contribution is to have each noise level be independent, as this uniquely enables our proposed
sampling schemes, such as stabilizing auto-regressive generation and conditioning on corrupted observations.
Further, AR-Diffusion only explores language modeling and does not explore guidance, while we investigate
Diffusion Forcing as a broadly applicable sequence generative model with particular applications to sequential
decision-making. In particular, we introduce Monte-Carlo Guidance as a novel guidance mechanism. Another
closely related work is Rolling Diffusion [52], which proposes to diffuse a sequence with near future more
certain and far future more uncertain, resembling the causally uncertain sampling scheme of Diffusion Forcing.
Like AR-Diffussion, Rolling Diffusion’s training noise levels are linearly dependent on the positions of tokens
and must use the exact same noise level scheme at sampling time. It, therefore, shares the aforementioned
limitations of AR-Diffusion as well.


D     Additional Method Details

D.1    Fused SNR reweighting

SNR reweighting [24] is a widely used technique to accelerate the convergence of image diffusion models. In
short, it reweighs the diffusion loss proportional to the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of noisy xk . In Diffusion
Forcing, conditioning variable zt−1 can also contain a non-trivial amount of information about xt , in addition to
                                                              kt−1
xkt t . For example, in a deterministic markovian system, if xt−1  has its noise level kt−1 = 0, the posterior state
zt−1 contains all the information needed to predict x0t regardless of the noise level of xkt t .
Therefore we re-derive SNR reweighting to reflect this change in Diffusion Forcing. We call this technique
Fused SNR reweighting. We follow the intuition of original SNR reweighting to loosely define SNR in a
sequence with independent levels of noises at different time steps. Denote St as the normalized SNR reweighting
factor for xkt t following its normal derivation in diffusion models. For example, if one uses min snr strategy
[24], its reweighting factor will always fall between [0, C] which we divide by C to get St ∈ [0, 1]. Define
                                                                              kt−1
signal decay factor 0 < γ < 1, measuring what proportion of signal in xt−1         contribute to denoising xkt t . This
is the simple exponential decay model of sequential information. Now, define cumulated SNR recursively as the
running mean of St : S̄t = γ S̄t−1 + (1 − γ)St to account for signals contributed by the entire noisy history to
the denoising at time step t. The other factor that contributes to the denoising is St of noisy observation xkt t .
To combine them, we use a simplified model for independent events. Notice St and S̄t always falls in range
[0, 1], and therefore can be reinterpreted as probabilities of having all the signal one needs to perfect denoise
xkt t . Since the noise level at t is independent of prior noise levels, we can view St and S̄t−1 as probabilities of
independent events and thus can composed to define a joint probability St′ = 1 − (1 − St )(1 − S̄t−1 ), and we
use this St′ as our fused SNR reweighting factor for diffusion training.
In our experiments, we choose to follow the min-SNR reweighting strategy [24] to derive the S. Our Fused
SNR reweighting proves extremely useful to accelerate the convergence of video prediction, while we didn’t
observe a boost on non-image domains so we didn’t use it there.


                                                             23
D.2    Architecture

Video Diffusion We choose both the raw image x and latent state z to be 2D tensors with channel, width,
and height. For simplicity, we use the same width and height for x and z. We then implement the transition
model p(xkt t |zt−1 ) with a typical diffusion U-net [47]. We use the output of the U-net as the input to a gated
recurrent unit (GRU) and use zt−1 as the hidden state feed into a GRU. The output of GRU is treated as zt .
For observation model p(xt |zt ), we use a 1-layer resnet [28] followed by a conv layer. We combine these two
models to create an RNN layer, where the latent of a particular time step is zt−1 , input is xkt t and output is x̂.
One can potentially obtain better results by training Diffusion Forcing with a causal transformer architecture.
However, since RNN is more efficient for online decision-making, we also stick with it for video prediction and
it already gives us satisfying results.
We choose the number of channels in z to be 16 for DMlab and 32 for Minecraft. In total, our Minecraft model
consists of 36 million parameters and our DMlab model consists of 24 million parameters. We can potentially
obtain a better Minecraft video prediction model with more parameters, but we defer that to future works to keep
the training duration reasonable (< 1 day). In maze planning, the number of total parameters is 4.33 million.
Non-Video Diffusion For non-spatial x that is not video nor images, we use residue MLPs [60] instead of
Unet as the backbone for the dynamics model. Residue MLP is basically the ResNet [28] equivalent for MLP.
Similar to video prediction, we feed the output of resMLP into a GRU along with zt−1 to get zt . Another
ResMLP serves as the observation model.

D.3    Diffusion parameterization
In diffusion models, there are three equivalent prediction objectives, x0 , ϵ [29], and v parameterization [53].
Different objectives lead to different reweighting of loss at different noise levels, together with SNR reweighting.
For example, ϵ parameterization and v parameterization are essential in generating pixel data that favors
high-frequency details.
In our experiments, we use v parameterization for video prediction and found it essential to both convergence
speed and quality.
We observe that x0 parameterization is strongly favorable in planning and imitation learning, likely because they
don’t favor an artificial emphasis on high-frequency details. We observe the benefits of v-parameterization in
time-series prediction.

D.4    Noise schedule
We use sigmoid noise schedule [9] for video prediction, linear noise schedule for maze planning, and cosine
schedule for everything else.

D.5    Implementation Details of Sampling with Guidance

Corner case of sampling noise In our sampling algorithm, due to the flexibility of the scheduling matrix
K, there are corner cases when xkt t is required to stay at its same noise level during a sampling step. The core
question of this corner case is whether we should updatexkt t at all. One option is just copying over the old
value. The other option is to run a backward diffusion followed by a forward diffusion back to its old noise level
to resample under the diffusion process. While we conclude this can be an open question, we prefer the later
approach, resampling, and use it in Monte Carlo Guidance to generate multiple samples. We note that even if
one takes the first approach, the guidance gradient can still flow back in the time steps before t as the dynamics
model p(zt |xkt t , zt−1 ) can still propagate the guidance gradient to zt−1 .
Other than Monte Carlo Guidance, this corner case only happens when kt = 0 or kt = K throughout our
experiments. That is, we chose our K such that once any token gets diffused slightly, it will keep diffusing. In
the case of kt = K, keeping xkt t at the same noise level implies it will stay as white noise, and we don’t even
need to sample another white noise. In case kt = 0, the time step is already completely diffused either approach
should give us the same result so we just opt for copying over for simplicity.
Guidance for maze planning In maze planning, our main baseline Diffuer [37] discards the reward from
the dataset and directly plans with the goal position and velocity. We adopt the same convention for Diffusion
Forcing. One can perform guidance on goal position using log-likelihood ||pT − g||, but a flexible horizon
model should not require users to manually specify a T to reach its P    goal, instead we want it to try to reach the
goal for any possible horizon. Therefore we use the reward model t ||pT − g|| so any time step can be the
final step to reach the goal. This objective is challenging due to the non-convex nature of 2D maze, but we found
Diffusion Forcing can still reliably find plans without bumping into walls. However, we also observe that the
agent tend to leave the goal location due to the nature of the provided dataset - the goal location is just one


                                                         24
possible waypoint for the robot to pass through, and there are no trajectories that simply stay at the goal. We
also tried this reward for guidance with Diffuser, but it didn’t work even with a good amount of tuning.

D.6    Performance Optimization
Accelerating the diffusion sampling of Diffusion Forcing is similar to that of normal diffusion models. We adopt
DDIM [58] sampling for the diffusion of each token. While we use K = 1000 steps of diffusion, we sample
with only 100 DDIM for video prediction and 50 for non-video domains.
While Diffusion Forcing can be implemented with transformers, we use an RNN as the backbone for Diffusion
Forcing experiments it’s widely used in decision-making for its flexibility and efficiency in online decision-
making systems. To further reduce training time and GPU memory usage, we use frame-stacking to stack
multiple observed images as a single x. This is due to the fact that adjacent tokens can be very similar - e.g.
recording the same motion at higher fps can lead to this. We deem that it’s wasteful if we roll out the dynamics
model multiple times to generate almost identical tokens. For video datasets, we manually examine how many
time steps it takes to require a minimal level of prediction power instead of copying frames over. There is another
reason why we use frame stacking - many diffusion model techniques such as different noise schedules are
designed to model x with correlated elements or redundancy. Low-dimensional systems may need drastically
different hyperparameters when they lack the data redundancy these techniques are tested on. Frame stacking is
thus also helpful for our non-image experiments so we can start with canonical hyperparameters of diffusion
models. We use a frame stack of 4 for DMlab video prediction, 8 for Minecraft, and 10 for maze planning.
At sampling time, we also have a design choice to reduce compute usage, as reflected in line 8 of Algorithm 2.
In line 8, we directly assign znew
                               t   to zt , instead of recalculating zt with posterior model p(zt |zt−1 , xnew
                                                                                                          t , k − 1).
Since the model is trained to condition on zt estimated from arbitrary noisy history, we recognize that both
are valid approaches. The reason why the choose line 8 is twofold. First, it cuts the compute by half, avoiding
computing posterior every step. Second, this happens to be what we want for stabilization - znewt   already contains
the information of the clean xnewt   under our simplified observation model, and happens to be estimated with
k = kt , a noise level higher than that of xnew
                                              t . This happens to implement the behavior we want for stabilization.


D.7    Sampling schedule for causal uncertainty
Inference is depicted in Algorithm 2 and Figure 2. In Equation D.1, we illustrate a specific instantiation of the K
matrix we used for causal planning. For simplicity, we denote the case where a latent z0 is given and aim to
generate x1:H+1 .
                                              K         K      K ...         K
                                                                                 
                                          K − 1        K      K ...         K 
                                          K − 2 K − 1 K ...                 K 
                                                                                 
                                           .             ..    ..  ..        .. 
                                           .                          .
                                           .              .     .             . 
                                                                                  
                                pyramid
                             K          =    1         2       3    ...     H                                 (D.1)
                                                                                 
                                                                                  
                                           0
                                                       1       2 ... H − 1      
                                           .            ..      .. ..         .. 
                                           .
                                           .             .       .    .        . 
                                                                                  
                                           0           0       0 ...         1 
                                              0         0       0 ...         0

Diffusion Forcing begins by sampling our sequences as white noise with noise level K. It then denoises along
each row m = 1, . . . , M of K in decreasing order. It does so by proceeding sequentially through frames
t = 1, . . . , T , updating the latent (Line 5 of Algorithm 2), and then partially applying the backward process
to noise level k = Km,t dictated by the scheduling matrix K (Line 6-7 of Algorithm 2). We call a K like this
pyramid scheduling, as the tokens in the far future are kept at higher noise level than near future.

D.8    Metrics for Maze Planning
We report the episode reward of Diffusion Forcing for different maze planning environments in Table 1. However,
we found that the episode reward isn’t necessarily a good metric: Intuitively, maze planning should reward
smart agents that can find the fastest route to the goal, not a slow-walking agent that goes there at the end of
the episode. The dataset never contains data on the behavior of staying at the goal, so agents are supposed to
walk away after reaching the goal with sequence planning methods. Diffuser may had an unfair advantage of
just generating slow plans, which happens to let the agent stay in the neighborhood of the goal for more steps
and get a very high reward as a result. This metric seems to exploit flaws in the environment design - a good
design would involve a penalty of longer time taken to reach the goal. Therefore, in future works based on our
paper, we encourage alternative metrics like the time it takes to reach the goal for the first time, which Diffusion
Forcing excels at.


                                                        25
Figure 6: Prediction intervals of Diffusion Forcing for the first prediction window of the test set in
the Electricity time series dataset. Only the first 16 features out of 370 are plotted.


D.9    Implementation Details of Timeseries Regression
We follow the implementation of pytorch-ts, where the validation set is a random subset of the training set with
the same number of sequences as the test set. We use early stopping when validation crps-sum hasn’t increased
for 6 epochs. We leverage the same architecture (1 mlp and 4 grus) as well as a batch size of 32.

D.10    Compute Resources
All of our experiments use f p16 mixed precision training. Time series, maze planning, compositionally, and
visual imitation experiments can be trained with a single 2080T i with 11GB of memory. We tune the batch
size such that we fully use the memory of GPUs. This translates to a batch size of 2048 for maze planning and
compositional experiments, and 32 for visual imitation learning. While we use early stopping on the validation
set for time series experiments, we did not carefully search for the minimal number of training steps required,
though the model usually converges between 50k to 100k steps. The above environments thus usually take 4 − 8
hours to train although there is without doubt a significant potential for speed up.
Video prediction is GPU intensive. We use 8 A100 GPUs for both video prediction datasets. We train for 50K
steps with a batch size of 8 × 16. It usually takes 12 hours to converge at 40K steps of training (occasional
validation time also included).


E      Additional Experiment Results

E.1    Multivariate Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting
To illustrate Diffusion Forcing’s new training objective does not degrade it as a generic sequence model, we
evaluate Diffusion Forcing on high-dimensional and long-horizon sequence prediction tasks in time series
prediction. We adopt multiple time series datasets with real-world applications from GluonTS [2] and evaluate
Diffusion Forcing with strong baselines with standard metrics in this domain. In this section, we mainly focus on
the results and analysis. For a detailed description of datasets and the metric, we refer the reader to Appendix F.4.
Problem Formulation Let X = {xt }Tt=1 be a sequence (multivariate time series) of D-dimensional
observations xt ∈ RD of some underlying dynamical process, sampled in discrete time steps t ∈ {1, . . . , T },
where T ∈ N. In the problem setting of probabilistic time series forecasting, the sequence X = {X c , X p } is
                                                                                                    0 −1
split into two subsequences at time step t0 ∈ N with 1 < t0 ≤ T : the context window X c := {xt }tt=1    (also
                                                                                     T
called history or evidence) of length t0 − 1, and the prediction window X p := {xt }t=t0 of length T − t0 + 1


                                                        26
(also known as the prediction horizon). Then, the task is to model the conditional joint probability distribution
                                                                  T
                                                                  Y
                                    q(xt0 :T | x1:t0 −1 ) :=             q(xt | x1:t−1 )                               (E.1)
                                                                  t=t0


over the samples in the prediction window. If we know the distribution in (E.1), we can sample forecast
prediction sequences given some initial context from the evidence sequence. However, most time-dependent
data generation processes in nature have complex dynamics and no tractable formulation of q(xt0 :T | x1:t0 −1 ).
Instead, we construct a statistical model that approximates the generative process in (E.1) and estimates quantiles
via Monte Carlo sampling of simulated trajectories. In this way, confidence levels or uncertainty measures can
be calculated, and point forecasts can be produced as the mean or median trajectory [36].

Table 2: Results for time series forecasting. We report the test set CRPSsum (the lower, the better) of
comparable methods on six time series datasets. We measure the mean and standard deviation of our
method from five runs trained with different seeds.
 Method                        Exchange          Solar             Electricity        Traffic          Taxi         Wikipedia
 VES [36]                    0.005 ± 0.000   0.900 ± 0.003        0.880 ± 0.004    0.350 ± 0.002         -               -
 VAR [45]                    0.005 ± 0.000   0.830 ± 0.006        0.039 ± 0.001    0.290 ± 0.001         -               -
 VAR-Lasso [45]              0.012 ± 0.000   0.510 ± 0.006        0.025 ± 0.000    0.150 ± 0.002         -         3.100 ± 0.004
 GARCH [62]                  0.023 ± 0.000   0.880 ± 0.002        0.190 ± 0.001    0.370 ± 0.001         -               -
 DeepAR [55]                       -         0.336 ± 0.014        0.023 ± 0.001    0.055 ± 0.003         -         0.127 ± 0.042
 LSTM-Copula [54]            0.007 ± 0.000   0.319 ± 0.011        0.064 ± 0.008    0.103 ± 0.006   0.326 ± 0.007   0.241 ± 0.033
 GP-Copula [54]              0.007 ± 0.000   0.337 ± 0.024        0.025 ± 0.002    0.078 ± 0.002   0.208 ± 0.183   0.086 ± 0.004
 KVAE [41]                   0.014 ± 0.002   0.340 ± 0.025        0.051 ± 0.019    0.100 ± 0.005         -         0.095 ± 0.012
 NKF [14]                          -         0.320 ± 0.020        0.016 ± 0.001    0.100 ± 0.002         -         0.071 ± 0.002
 Transformer-MAF [51]        0.005 ± 0.003   0.301 ± 0.014        0.021 ± 0.000    0.056 ± 0.001   0.179 ± 0.002   0.063 ± 0.003
 TimeGrad [50]               0.006 ± 0.001   0.287 ± 0.020        0.021 ± 0.001    0.044 ± 0.006   0.114 ± 0.020   0.049 ± 0.002
 ScoreGrad sub-VP SDE [68]   0.006 ± 0.001   0.256 ± 0.015        0.019 ± 0.001    0.041 ± 0.004   0.101 ± 0.004   0.043 ± 0.002
 Ours                        0.003 ± 0.001   0.289 ± 0.002        0.023 ± 0.001    0.040 ± 0.004   0.075 ± 0.002   0.085 ± 0.007



Results. We evaluate the effectiveness of Diffusion Forcing as a sequence model on the canonical task of
multivariate time series forecasting by following the experiment setup of [54, 51, 50, 59, 68] Concretely, we
benchmark Diffusion Forcing on the datasets Solar, Electricity, Traffic, Taxi, and Wikipedia. These datasets have
different dimensionality, domains, and sampling frequencies, and capture seasonal patterns of different lengths.
The features of each dataset are detailed in Table 3. We access the datasets from GluonTS [2], and set the
context and prediction windows to the same length for each dataset. Additionally, we employ the same covariates
as [50]. We evaluate the performance of the model quantitatively by estimating the Summed Continuous Ranked
Probability Score CRPSsum via quantiles. As a metric, CRPSsum measures how well a forecast distribution
matches the ground truth distribution. We provide detailed descriptions of the metric in Appendix F.4. We
benchmark with other diffusion-based methods in time series forecastings, such as TimeGrad [50] and the
transformer-based Transformer-MAF [51]. In particular, the main baseline of interest, TimeGrad [50], is a next-
token diffusion sequence model trained with teacher forcing. We track the CRPSsum metric on the validation set
and use early stopping when the metric has not improved for 6 consecutive epochs, while all epochs are fixed
to 100 batches across datasets. We then measure the CRPSsum on the test set at the end of the training, which
we report in Table 2. We use the exact same architecture and hyperparameters for all time series datasets and
experiments. Diffusion Forcing outperforms all prior methods except for [68] with which Diffusion Forcing is
overall tied, except for the Wikipedia dataset, on which Diffusion Forcing takes fourth place. Note that time
series is not the core application of Diffusion Forcing, and that we merely seek to demonstrate that the Diffusion
Forcing objective is applicable to diverse domains with no apparent trade-off in performance over baseline
objectives.


E.2    Additional results in compositional generation

Since Diffusion Forcing models the joint distribution of any subset of a sequence, we can leverage this unique
property to achieve compositional behavior - i.e., Diffusion Forcing can sample from the distribution of subsets
of the trajectory and compose these sub-trajectories into new trajectories.
In particular, we show that we can also have flexible control over how compositional Diffusion Forcing is. As
shown in 7, consider a dataset of trajectories on a 2D, square plane, where all trajectories start from one corner
and end up in the opposite corner, forming a cross shape. When no compositional behavior is desired, one can
let the models replicate the cross-shaped distribution by allowing full memory of the HMM model. When one
desires compositional such as generating a V-shaped trajectory, which stitches two sub-trajectories together, one
can let the model generate shorter plans with no-memory context using MPC. (Add figures).


                                                             27
                (a) Dataset                      (b) W/ memory                      (c) W/o memory
Figure 7: Given a dataset of trajectories (a), Diffusion Forcing models the joint distribution of all
subsequences of arbitrary length. At sampling time, we can sample from the trajectory distribution
by sampling Diffusion Forcing with full horizon (b) or recover Markovian dynamics by disregarding
previous states (c).


E.3    Additional results in video prediction (wo/ cherry picking)

Infinite Rollout without sliding window Diffusion Forcing can rollout longer than maximum training
horizonwithout sliding window. That is, we run Diffusion Forcing’s RNN continuously without ever reinitializing
z0 . This is a surprising effect we observed from the rollout stabilization property of Diffusion Forcing. In
Figure 8, 10, we use Diffusion Forcing to generate video sequences of length 180 and visualize subsampled
sequences. Notably, Diffusion Forcing used in these visualizations is trained with a maximum length of 72
frames for Minecraft and 36 frames for DMLab, illustrating it can rollout 2x-5x times longer than it’s trained on
without sliding window. In addition, we also tried rolling these models out for 2000 frames and without seeing
the model blowing up on both datasets. There are occasional cases where the Minecraft agent gets stuck and the
entire screen is the “dirt” block, but this is more of a dataset issue E.5 and the agent is able to recover after it
turns around.




Figure 8: Visualization shows Diffusion Forcing trained on 72 frames is able to rollout 180 frames on
Minecraft dataset without sliding window. The visualization shows a non-cherry-picked subsampling
of these 180 frames, although Diffusion Forcing can roll out much longer (such as 2000 frames) on
this dataset.

Consistency We also present additional results where we only generate within our maximum training length.
As shown in figure 13 12, Diffusion Forcing can generate consistent videos. Results are not cherry-picked.



                                                        28
Figure 9: Diffusion Forcing trained on 72 frames is able to rollout 180 frames on Minecraft dataset
without sliding window. The visualization shows a non-cherry-picked subsampling of these 180
frames, although Diffusion Forcing can roll out much longer (such as 2000 frames) on this dataset.
The first few frames marked in red are the ground truth images of the dataset used for conditioning.


E.4   Additional results in planning
We provide some additional visualizations of causal planning in 15. We also present additional visualization of
Diffusion Forcing performing model predictive control in action. As shown in figure 14, Diffusion Forcing can
generate plans of shorter horizons since it’s flexible horizon.




                                                      29
Figure 10: Visualization shows Diffusion Forcing trained on 36 frames is able to rollout 180 frames
on DMLab dataset without sliding window. The visualization shows a non-cherry-picked subsampling
of these 180 frames, although Diffusion Forcing can roll out almost infinitely on this dataset. The
first few frames marked in red are the ground truth images of the dataset used for conditioning.


E.5    Real robot experiment setup
In Figure 16 we visualize our robot experiment setup with corruption on observation. The dataset is collected
when the target bag isn’t present, while we test with such a bag in the scene zero-shot for the imitation learning
experiment with observation corruption. The typical failure mode is when the robot no longer reacts to the visual
clues of the randomized location of objects. We didn’t observe the robot act wildly due to visual distractors.


F     Additional details about datasets

F.1   Dataset for video diffusion
We adopt the video prediction dataset Minecraft and DMlab used by TECO[69].


                                                       30
Figure 11: Visualization shows Diffusion Forcing trained on 36 frames is able to rollout 180 frames
on DMLab dataset without sliding window. The visualization shows a non-cherry-picked subsampling
of these 180 frames, although Diffusion Forcing can roll out almost infinitely on this dataset. The
first few frames marked in red are the ground truth images of the dataset used for conditioning.




Minecraft Navigation The Minecraft navigation dataset consists of first-person-view videos of random
walks in the Minecraft ‘swamp‘ biome. The agent walks via a technique called ‘sprint jump‘ which allows it
to jump across blocks without getting stuck at 1 block obstacles. The agent walks straight most of the time,
with small chances of turning left or right. The height and width of the video is 128 pixels and we trim long
videos to subsequences of 72 frames. The dataset comes with paired action data but we discard them to bring
more stochasticity to the prediction task. Due to limited compute, we only train on about 10% of the total
subsequences.
One problem we noticed about the dataset is when the agent runs into obstacles with a height of 2 blocks or
more. In this case, the agent will get stuck and the entire video sequence will consist of grey granite patterns or
brown dirty patterns. This leads to a huge amount of frames with these patterns, making video models predict
meaningless frames. Yet, we deem this as a problem of this dataset itself.


                                                        31
Figure 12: Additional non-cherry-picked video prediction results on DMLab dataset, generated
within maximum training length. The first few frames marked in red are the ground truth images of
the dataset used for conditioning.


DMLab Navigation Deepmind Lab navigation dataset consists of random walks in a 3D maze environment.
For DMLab, the resolution is 64 pixels and we use subsequences of 48 frames. We also disregard the provided
actions due to training.
We note that the VQ-VAE latent that stable video diffusion [4] diffuses is also only 128 × 128 × 3, indicating
Diffusion Forcing has the potential to scale up to higher resolution images with pre-trained image encoder and
decoders. Due to the sheer size of the datasets, we only use about 10% of the total data sequences for training
due to limited computing, as we observe that doing so already allows us to make good generations from initial
frames from the test set.


F.2   Dataset for planning

D4RL [18] is a standard offline RL benchmark featuring a wide range of reinforcement learning environments.
Each environment is associated with a provided dataset of offline interactions with the environment featuring
state, action, and reward trajectories.
Like Diffuer [37], we choose the 3 maze environments as they are challenging long-horizon, multi-modal, sparse
reward problems uniquely suited for visualization and evaluating planning algorithms. The IDs for the 3 used
environments are “maze2d-medium-v1”, “maze2d-large-v1”, “maze2d-umaze-v1”. In each environment, one
controls the acceleration of a robot to walk it towards a goal. The observation space is 4 dimensional, featuring
2D location and velocity. The action space is 2D acceleration. The agent always receives a random start location
and the goal is to reach a fixed goal position for each maze. The agent receives a reward of 1 if it is within a
circle of radius 0.5 centered at the goal state, and 0 otherwise.


                                                       32
Figure 13: Additional non-cherry-picked video prediction results on the Minecraft dataset, generated
within maximum training length. The first few frames marked in red are the ground truth images of
the dataset used for conditioning.


The offline RL dataset for the maze environments consists of random walks in the maze. Specifically, the
authors first designate all intersections and turn in the maze as waypoints and code an agent to navigate between
waypoints with some randomization. As a result, the random walks are generated in a way that the path is
collision-free with the walls. The random walks introduce stochasticity to the dataset, as trajectories in the
dataset are never towards a specific goal.
There are a few choices adopted from our main baseline Diffuser [37]: we disregard the reward in the dataset and
plan with goals only. We also evaluate a multi-goal variant of each environment (labeled as “multi” in Table 1),
where the goal is randomized just like the starting position.

F.3   Dataset for robot learning
We choose a long horizon robotic manipulation task as described in Section 4.4: Consider a tabletop with three
slots where we can place objects. One places an apple at slot A or slot B randomly, and then places an orange at
the other slot between A and B. A robot is challenged to swap the position of two fruits using the third slot C.
That is, it can only move a fruit to an empty slot at a time. For example, when the apple is at slot A and the
orange is at slot B, it may move the apple to slot C, leaving slot A empty. Then move the orange to slot A and
finally move the apple from slot C to slot B. In figure 4, we illustrate the non-markovian property of the task:
When the apple is at slot B and the orange is at slot C, one cannot tell what the immediate action is without
knowing the initial positions of objects.
We put stickers on the table indicating a circular region occupied by any slot. Each circular region is designed to
be about double the diameter of a fruit. To make sure the task requires visual feedback, we also randomize the
location of a fruit inside the slot. We collected 150 expert demonstrations of a Franka robot performing the task
using VR teleoperation and impedance control. Among them, each initial slot configuration makes up half of the
dataset. We record videos from two camera views, one from a hand camera and one in the front capturing all
three slots. Each demonstration also comes with 6 dof actions of the robot hand. During the data collection,
since one successful demonstration will swap the position of two objects, its end configuration will naturally
serve as the starting configuration of the other randomized location, which we leverage to save time.
Each demonstration comprises 500 − 600 frames and actions. We train Diffusion Forcing on the entire sequence.
However, since adjacent frames are visually close, we pad and downsample the videos to 40 frames where each
frame is bundled with 15 actions.

F.4   Dataset for time series
We use a set of time series datasets accessible via GluonTS [2], which are adopted from prior works like
[72, 42, 56]. These datasets capture real-world data of high-dimensional dynamics like monetary exchange
rates or the electricity grid. In Table 3, we provide a summary of the features of these datasets, such as the
dimensionality, the domains, the sampling frequency, the length of the multivariate sequence in the training set,
and the prediction length. We access the datasets in Table 3 via GluonTS and wrap the data processing functions
implemented in GluonTS in our own dataloaders. Each dataset consists of one long multivariate sequence, which


                                                       33
Figure 14: Example MPC planning for maze medium environment. Blue indicated trajectories
actually executed already. Red is the plan.




Figure 15: Example plans generated for maze medium (above) and maze large (below) environments.


is the training split, and a set of short sequences that make up the test split. We construct a validation set of the
same cardinality as the held-out test set as a randomly sampled subset of subsequences from the training set. All
splits are normalized by the mean and the standard deviation of the features in the training split.
Covariates Often, statistical models that approximate (E.1) benefit from manually curated features as additional
input to the observations. A sequence of covariates C = {ct }Tt=1 can be constructed to help the model recognize
seasonal patterns and other temporal dependencies. We follow the implementation in [51] to construct the
covariate sequence as a function of the frequency of each dataset in Table 3. As such, our covariates are composed
of lagged inputs, as well as learned embeddings and handcrafted temporal features that encode information such
as the hour of the day or the day of the month, depending on the sampling rate of the particular time series that is


                                                         34
Figure 16: We randomly throw a target bag on the table as a strong visual distractor. Diffusion
Forcing can be prompted to treat observation as corrupted rather than ground truth.

                  Table 3: Characteristics of the GluonTS datasets used to benchmark
                  Diffusion Forcing in the domain of time series forecasting.
                    Dataset       Dimension    Domain         Frequency         Steps    Prediction length
                                                  +
                    Exchange          8          R          BUSINESS DAY        6,071              30
                    Solar            137         R+            HOUR             7,009              24
                    Electricity      370         R+            HOUR             5,833              24
                    Traffic          963        (0,1)          HOUR             4,001              24
                    Taxi            1,214         N            30-MIN           1,488              24
                    Wikipedia       2,000         N             DAY              792               30



being modeled. Therefore, covariates are known for the entire interval [1, T ], even at inference. We can easily
incorporate covariates into the probabilistic framework as
                                                                  T
                                                                  Y
                              q(xt0 :T | x1:t0 −1 , c1:T ) :=          q(xt | x1:t0 −1 , c1:T ).             (F.1)
                                                                t=t0

The benefit obtained from covariates is highly dependent on the characteristics of both the dataset and the model
used, as well as the feature engineering practices followed.
Metric The Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) [46] is a scoring function that measures how well
the forecast distribution matches the ground truth distribution:
                                                  Z
                                 CRPS(F, x) =        (F (z) − I {x ≤ z})2 dz ,
                                                        R

where F (z) is the univariate cumulative distribution function (CDF) over the predicted value, x is a ground truth
observation, and I {x ≤ z} is the indicator function that is one if x ≤ z and zero otherwise. By summing the
D-dimensional Ptime series along the feature dimension for simulated samples (resulting in F̂sum (t)) and ground
truth data (as i x0i,t ), we can report the CRPSsum
                                                       "                           !#
                                                                         X 0
                             CRPSsum = Et∼U (t0 ,T ) CRPS F̂sum (t),          xi,t
                                                                                     i

as the average over the prediction window. The lower the CRPSsum value, the better the predicted distribution
match the data distribution.
First, we manually sum the time series along the feature dimension and estimate the CDF F̂sum (t) via 19 quantile
levels at each time step t from 100 sampled trajectories. We then use the implementation in GluonTs [2] to
compute the CRPS, which we report as CRPSsum in Table 2. While we aggregate the data manually, we verify
that the numerical error relative to the GluonTS implementation remains orders of magnitude below the precision
threshold of the reported metric.




                                                             35
